Luxury timber pods connect to create a house that brings the outside in
Is it OK to have a Christmas party at Hooters? How can I tell my co-workers their Halloween costumes are racist? I accidentally hugged the CEO. How embarrassed should I be?
These are the kinds of questions that often land in Allison Green’s mailbox. Green is the manager behind the popular Ask a Manager blog, which she launched almost 10 years ago while working at a not-for-profit organization in Washington DC and now attracts 2 million visitors a month.
It all happened on a whim, she says. Frustrated with seeing people “both in the hiring process but also internally within the office” make bad choices, Green decided to start a blog.
“The common denominator with all of this stuff is that you don’t understand how your manager or your interviewer is thinking. I thought there is a place to give insight into how managers and how job interviewers think. And really on a whim – my boyfriend had gone out and I was bored – I put together the Ask a Manager blog,” she says. “I didn’t think anybody would read it. I had no idea how I would go about getting an audience. I figured I would do it for maybe three to six months and get it out of my system and then I would be done and move on with my life.”
Yet people did find it. Of the 2 million visitors she gets a month, about half have never visited the site before. “I am not clear on how that happened,” she laughs. “I didn’t do any SEO [search engine optimization] or any of that stuff you are supposed to do to build an audience. I think I got really lucky with the timing. Somehow people found it and started sending in questions.”
Green now receives 50 to 60 questions a day, answering just a fraction. The thing that sets her blog apart, she says, is the ability to answer a question about specific situations with several twists.
“If someone doesn’t read the column, they might think: ‘Work advice? That sounds really boring.’ But when you read it, it’s not really just work advice. It’s interpersonal advice. It’s advice about your own personal issues that are causing problems for you, maybe in your career. That’s so much more interesting than talking about how to make your résumé,” she explains. “There is real hunger out there for a place that people can go to ask really nuanced questions.”
“What she had done for me is really drill in my head that you have to confront the reality of your situation, not what you wish your situation were,” she says. 
When selecting letters from readers to answer, Green often looks for awkwardness. “There is a really uncomfortable thing going on and everyone feels awkward about it and the only way you are going to get it to stop is if you are willing to suck it up and say something that no one wants to because it’s a horrible conversation to have,” says Green.
One of her favorite letters was from someone who worked at an office where the receptionist kept hugging everyone who came to the office. “And not just a quick hug, like a full body-hug where she would hold on for like a full minute. People were really uncomfortable and no one knew what to say to her and they were worried their appointments didn’t want to come to their office any more,” she says. Her advice: talk to the receptionist. Have the awkward conversation and move on.
“Some of the drama is very soap opera-ish. I have a real taste for the weird and so if I get a crazy letter, it goes straight to the top of my list. I love the crazy letters. I always wonder: ‘Am I pushing the balance too far in that direction?’ But people really like it. It makes it so much more interesting. I have people say to me all the time that reading the column makes them appreciate their own workplace and their own boss.”
Much has changed in the job market since 2007 – the unemployment rate went up, then down. Co-working spaces became trendy and the threat of robots taking over our jobs became slightly more real. Yet at the core of it, people still worry about the same stuff, says Green.
“The most common stuff is: ‘I have a terrible boss, what do I do? I want my co-worker to stop doing this annoying thing but I don’t want to say anything to them about it, is there a magic pill?’ Those haven’t changed and probably will never change. There is stuff that changed around the edges. A year after I started we plunged into a recession, and that had a huge impact on the job market, and so the nature of the questions that I was getting for a few years was upsetting and stressful, really. There were people who had been out of work for years,” she says.
“I am still talking to millennials who can’t get job in their field because when they graduated, they graduated into a terrible recession and they have been working at Starbucks for several years and now no one will hire them for the job they got a degree in. I have also seen things getting better post-recession. People are also more willing to leave bad situations than they were in the middle years that I was writing.” 
There have been other changes too. There are more questions about telecommuting and perks that disappeared during the recession and haven’t yet made it back. There are also a lot more questions about animal-friendly offices and how to navigate them.
“The most interesting was probably from someone who went to work in an office that was dog-friendly and a bunch of people brought their dogs in and she had really debilitating allergies. The company did not want to work with her on it and legally they had to accommodate her. But people were pissed. People felt like they had come to the company specifically because it was dog friendly and she was ruining it. It became a very hostile environment for her,” Green explains. “She ultimately had to leave over it because there was such a huge clash of her interest against their interests. You can kind of see where they are coming from too – it’s their culture.”
For Green, who at 43 has spent most of her life working at and with not-for-profit groups, doling out advice in a friendly conversational manner – (“It’s sort of like answering an email from a friend,” she says) – feels like working for a cause, “doing good in the world”.
“I think as long as it continues to feel like that, I’ll keep doing that,” she says.
Luxury timber pods connect to create a house that brings the outside in
The Co-op is recalling chocolate Santas after batteries were found inside two of them.
The retailer said there were two “alleged tampering incidents” involving the hollow milk chocolate figures, which sell for £1.
It has informed the police and Food Standards Agency and started a national product recall.
There was no indication of any blackmail demand or threat, a spokesman said.
The Co-op has sold 165,000 of the German-made Santas, which are available from other retailers, and has advised people not to eat them.
The Santas with batteries were found in two separate locations, some distance apart.
A Co-op spokesman said: “The health and safety of our customers is our top priority. We are concerned about two separate instances of alleged product tampering involving our hollow milk chocolate Santa foil figures, which have been found to contain a small battery inside.
“As a result we have begun a UK-wide product recall. The police and Food Standards Agency are being notified. Customers with one of these products should not eat it but call our customer relations team for a full refund.”
Anyone who is concerned should call 0800 0686 727 for free. The Co-op said no other products were affected.
 The trees came first – five ancient oaks amid which this trinity of pods in Beaminster, Dorset, has arisen in homage. When it rains the stainless steel gutters water said trees. Less fortunate oaks were sacrificed to construct the cladding, floors and the decked areas that wrap round each pod and extend the main rooms into the garden when the glass doors are open. The impression is of three humble holiday cabins floating just above the gravel on this hilltop. Look closer and they’re connected by glass and wood walkways. Photographs by Humberts
Three long-serving primary school cleaners, who went on strike over claims their wages and conditions were cut when a private company took over the contract, have been sacked days before Christmas.
The women – Lesley Leake, Marice Hall and Karen McGee – sparked a debate over outsourcing when they went on strike for 14 weeks after their school in West Yorkshire was turned into an academy earlier this year.
Known as the “Kinsley cleaners”, the women said they had their wages cut from £7.85 an hour to the minimum wage of £7.20 once the contract switched from Wakefield council to C&D Cleaning in April.
The women, who between them have more than 28 years’ experience cleaning Kinsley primary school, returned to work earlier this month. But on Thursday they were told they had been sacked.
Jeremy Corbyn said he was angered by the news of the cleaners’ dismissal. “When I met them, they explained how their wages were cut following the outsourcing of their contracts to a private company,” the Labour leader said.
“Outsourcing is bad for our public services and workers. The cleaners’ jobs must be brought back in-house with fair pay and conditions. The race to the bottom in wages and working conditions faced by huge numbers of workers right across Britain is a national disgrace and Labour would put a stop to it.”
Dave Prentis, the Unison general secretary, said the women had bravely taken action to protect their wages and employment rights. “To then sack them just days before Christmas is heartless in the extreme,” he said, adding that the union would be consulting lawyers over the decision to dismiss them.
Speaking to the Guardian in October, Leake – who has two adult children and a second job – said her pension, sick pay and holiday entitlement had also been hit by the outsourcing. “The first month [under C&D Cleaning] when we got our payslips we just thought it could be a few teething problems, but the second month it was the same, and it just went on and on,” she said.
The women said they had tried to raise the issues with C&D Cleaning but were “fobbed off”. In the end the three got in touch with their union, Unison, but C&D Cleaning, based in nearby Barnsley, was reluctant to discuss the women’s cases.
In one email seen by the Guardian, the company’s head of human resources, Nick Thorpe, replied to Unison: “I understand … the impact for you as an organisation when members realise that we are no longer living in the 1980s and they question the actual value of union membership when you have no say, power or influence over their employer.”
The three women decided to go on strike, staging their first picket outside the school at the beginning of September. “It was a bit scary at first because none of us have ever done anything like this, but we didn’t know what else we could do,” said Leake. “It wasn’t just the money we were losing, it was the stress that was affecting us and our families as well.”
A statement from C&D Cleaning read: “The employees were invited to a disciplinary hearing on an earlier date in December to respond to allegations of gross misconduct. At the employees’ request, the hearing took place on 19 December 2016 as their chosen Unison representative was not available on the earlier date.
“Full details of the allegations were provided to the employees in advance of the hearing. The employees and their representative were given full opportunity to put their cases. The outcome of the hearing was termination of employment. The individuals have been informed of their right of appeal. The company will not comment further at this stage so as not prejudice any internal process.”
Jon Trickett, the local MP, said all the “three courageous women” had done was stand up for their right to work. “With only days until Christmas, it looks like Scrooge has been brought back to life from Victorian times and ruined the festive period for three families in my constituency,” he said.
He said the women’s experiences were unfortunately common. “Our country needs better pay, better conditions and better corporate governance to make sure that all employees are treated fairly,” he said. “It is also time that we stopped outsourcing services paid for by the taxpayer to rogue employers.”
Barter has been going on for thousands of years, but as Mark Williams, managing director of trading platform Bartercard UK puts it, “gone are the days when you swapped a sheep for a goat”.
New technology, Williams explains, means the potential of barter is expanding fast: it’s no longer about one business swapping its products on an ad hoc basis: instead a company may barter across a diverse range of sectors, including internationally – and receive substantial value back in return.
If you’re an office furniture business, for example, and have some stock left over, it can be hard to find a taker for the last few chairs and desks. As members of a barter scheme, such as Bartercard, the furniture business will sell the chairs at the retail price for “trade pounds”, which have the same value as sterling. It then gets to spend the pounds it has earned on other items within the membership group. This might be restaurant meals, accountancy advice, tickets for the races or nights in a fancy hotel.
In this way, barter has the potential to free up a company’s cashflow, even out the peaks and troughs of demand and squeeze more value out of goods or services that wouldn’t otherwise be sold.
“We’re not there to take away any of the current cash business, but to sit alongside it,” Williams says.
It’s a sector that is growing quickly. Bartercard’s UK franchise, the business started in Australia 25 years ago and now operates globally, has more than 2,000 members and hopes to reach 20,000 within five years.
According to the US-based International Reciprocal Trade Association’s president and CEO Ron Whitney, the UK’s organised barter sector is one of the fastest growing in the world. “The only limitation to barter industry growth is lack of awareness of the benefits in the business community,” he says. “However, barter awareness is definitely on an upswing.”
If a business has any degree of unused capacity, in the form of time or inventory “you should use a barter strategy to maximise your business’s sales capacity,” says Whitney. “Additionally, barter exchanges provide a built-in new market for startup companies to sell to and buy from. Participation in a barter exchange can provide an important jumpstart for new businesses.”
In York, Hedley House hotel owner Greg Harrand says barter has taken some of the anxiety out of the seasonal hospitality business. 
“If I don’t sell a night tonight, that’s gone; I can’t sell that night again,” he says. Hedley House is full every weekend and on race days and bank holidays, but if there’s spare capacity mid-week, which Harrand knows is likely at certain times of year, it’s far better for him to earn trade pounds than see no value from those rooms at all.
Harrand has used his trade pounds to pay a local carpet cleaner, to buy bacon and sausages from a local butcher who’s a fellow Bartercard member, and even to reward staff who’ve done a good job. “One of my managers is a Manchester United fan, and I gave him £1,500 of football tickets, which you actually wouldn’t have been able to buy in the cash world, but were available to Bartercard members,” he says. “That meant a lot to him [and] the actual cost to me was around £150 [because of the cost price of the unsold rooms he traded on the platform].”
Rob Marsden, who owns multi-sensory branding firm IOH Branding, says he’s traded around £1.5m worth of goods in the 17 years he’s been a Bartercard member. He’s also found a whole new group of customers through the scheme.
“They guarantee that they will get you leads, and so it’s business we wouldn’t have found elsewhere,” Marsden says. “People say ‘we’d rather have cash’ ... but most businesses have some surplus, and using this system you always sell at retail to maintain the margins.”
In theory, businesses can barter virtually anything: tattoos, physiotherapy, boats and even houses have been traded via the barter system. It’s also seen as a credible way of doing business by governments and multinationals. An example from the 90s saw Pepsi sign a $3bn deal with the Soviet Union, bartering its soft-drink syrup for vodka and freight ships.
Ideally, where small and medium-sized businesses are involved, you need a critical mass of members in a geographical area. “If you go town by town, building up to 250 members, it really starts to work,” says Williams.
However, while swapping a goat for a sheep doesn’t involve anything more than a handshake, at this rather more sophisticated level, there there are costs – though not necessarily always cash – involved. Astus UK, for example, helps companies secure media space by negotiating access to, and then bartering, goods and services needed by large broadcasters. It operates at a very large scale and opts not to charge businesses to take part. Instead it invests in certain suppliers, and rather than requiring a monetary dividend return, asks for “capacity” which is then used in exchanges that are part-barter and part-cash.
“A broadcaster might give us a million pounds worth of airtime, and get back a million pounds worth of outdoor [advertising] space,” says David Jones, managing director of Astus. “It gives a significant cashflow benefit.”
In contrast, Bartercard members pay a monthly fee in both cash and trade pounds, plus a percentage on every sale. It also extends a line of interest-free credit, that increases with each level of membership. 
While cash will always be king, using up spare stock or capacity offers businesses a helpful way to keep their balance in the black, and comes into its own when there’s a capital expenditure in the offing or ongoing costs that have to be stumped up. “Last month we moved offices,” says Marsden, “and I got all our furniture and carpet on trade pounds. It would have cost £20,000 in cash.” 
He believes that having the option to barter has made his company healthier, reduced overheads and resulted in new cash business. “We always look at Bartercard options before buying elsewhere,” he says. “We can’t always do it, but we always look there first.”
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
Amazon’s Go concept store is the perfect example of digital technology doing what it does best: getting out the way. The checkout-free shop uses proximity sensors, cameras and an app to make the in-store experience so seamless that you can literally pick items off the shelf, walk out with them, and have them automatically billed to your account.
This simple focus on making the user experience as smooth as possible is a sharp contrast to how many marketing teams have tried to maximise in-store technology. Conversations around proximity sensors or beacons typically focus on actively getting consumers to go out of their way to fulfil a brand’s desires, or interrupting them as they use their phone.
It’s a marketing dream that a consumer in the crisp aisle could receive a notification on their phone directing them to a new drink three aisles away that would go perfectly with their prawn cocktail crisps, and perhaps even offer them a trial coupon to entice them. Once there, why not notify them of a personalised buy-one-get-one-free offer on a chocolate bar their loyalty card data tells us they used to love, but haven’t picked up in a while?
You can see the attraction to marketers who can cash in on the phone in your pocket and use it, and all sorts of data, to their advantage. The trouble, of course, comes when you start thinking of the consumer experience you’re creating. For most people, grocery shopping is at best an enjoyable errand, at worse a traumatic experience dragging around kicking and screaming kids. Their mission on entering a store is to find everything they want and get out as quickly as possible.
No doubt there’s a certain type of person who’d happily bounce across a supermarket if it got them the best deals, but for most people the prospect of turning shopping into a complex treasure hunt is far from appealing. Similarly, just because you’re checking your Facebook newsfeed in the checkout queue doesn’t mean you’ll want to abandon your place and head back into the melee when an interesting offer pops up.
Digital marketing efforts and platforms need to start by bringing genuine utility to people. That’s why the satellite navigation app Waze has gone from strength to strength, offering a route-finding service, into which occasionally an advert is shown.
Ad-first services still haven’t properly taken off – if consumers aren’t using an app to their advantage in their daily lives they’re unlikely to want to install it just to interact with your advert. If marketers want to divert shoppers around different parts of a supermarket and past their products, they need to find a genuinely useful way of doing so. Perhaps the answer is an app that can take your shopping list, map out where every item is in the shop, and guide you round it like an indoor satnav? It still feels a little over-engineered, but perhaps some people would find a use for it and be open to having special offers flagged along the journey.
Truthfully, there’s an even bigger lesson to learn: that for the most part we need to stop asking people to do anything at all. It’s usually hard enough just to make shoppers aware of your product and to stay front of mind when it comes time to buying it, let alone wanting to force them through hoops along the way.
Stop asking what we can get consumers to do with digital technology (and subsequently which needy messaging and desperate incentives we’ll need to try to force them to do it) and start thinking about how digital technology can seamlessly get out of their way. Even a platform such as Facebook, which seemingly offers an easy way to drive this “engagement”, abandoned its focus on this years ago, pointing marketers instead to how it could get their messages in front of billions of largely passive users. It’s painful that much of the industry is still chasing these vanity metrics or trying to force people away from what they want to do, which is to swipe on to the next story in their feed.
It’s definitely a challenge for traditional marketing that consumers are turning to mobile and digital screens, and it’s disrupting all industries. The mobile phone, for instance, is now arguably the main competitor for chewing gum and chocolate sales at the checkout as we choose to stare at it rather than be led into other temptations. Yet advertisers need to stay routed in very clear laws of marketing and not get led astray by the temptation to try new things for the sake of them. You’ll need a lot of people to know your product exists, and to think about it when and where it’s available, for it to fly off the shelves. It’s a classic challenge that needs a solid creative and media response, and it’s a lot more rewarding than trying to chase a shopper round a virtual supermarket maze or get them to take your Facebook quiz.
To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your inbox, sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership.
All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out more here.
When I decided to fund a TV commercial on Christmas Day, I didn’t realise it would lead to the start of a campaign to ask large businesses to change their approach to charitable giving and support small charities.
Here’s how that came about.
After I was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia, which left me in need of a gruelling stem cell transplant, I spent the best part of 2014 in hospital. While there I benefitted from the amazing work that charities do, so when I left hospital I wanted to give something back.
I not only wanted to give the gift of funding but of awareness. I settled on a Christmas Day TV advert to highlight the work of a specific charity, as well as advertising on product packs. But when I approached some of the UK’s leading charities, I was shocked to be made to feel as if I had to prove myself and my brand to earn their approbation. Sadly I was too small for them, and they were too big to care.
The experience made me look beyond these big, well-known charities to the smaller ones doing extraordinary work on a shoestring. They are overlooked when it comes to big corporate giving but their work is just as important, if not more so. I vowed then and there to do something to help.
I have written and directed a two-minute TV commercial (with no mention of the products I sell) and have secured a prime time spot on Channel 4 on Christmas Day, timed to air just after the Queen’s Christmas broadcast. This is the advert I wantto use to shine a light on these small-time heroes.
I approached a small, Tetbury-based national charity called Hope For Tomorrow, which works tirelessly to provide mobile chemotherapy units to local NHS Trusts so patients don’t have to travel for hours for treatment. The charity leapt at the chance to work with me because such opportunities to raise awareness of their work don’t come their way often, and I was thrilled to be involved with such a great cause.
But I was shocked by the huge gap between big and small organisations in the charity sector. The larger charities get the lion’s share of corporate giving, leaving the smaller ones scrabbling for scraps.
This is a flaw in the charity sector, and much of the problem comes from an unbalanced relationship with business. Large organisations mainly work with large charities that already have a global level of awareness. It’s almost as though businesses are glory hunting when it comes to charity partnerships, to the detriment of smaller charities.
I have launched a campaign calling for large corporations to support small charities and shout about the ones they are already supporting. So whatever your cause, please sign my pledge and help to make a change this Christmas.
I have also dedicated a page on my Black Farmer website to help businesses and small charities find each other. As businesses, it’s important to show that we care for bigger things than just the products we sell.
Talk to us on Twitter via @Gdnvoluntary and join our community for your free Guardian Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to you on the first Thursday of the month.
When I moved in July I gave gas and electricity readings to npower. The electricity reading was significantly less than npower’s previous estimate, while the gas reading was higher.
However, the final electricity bill used the estimate, which was higher than the supplied reading, while the gas bill went with the meter reading, which was higher than the estimate.
This statement showed I was in credit by £37.99. I advised npower that I was due a bigger refund because it had overestimated my electricity. In response I received a bill for £270. It then admitted it had made a mistake… and instead issued a bill for £265.64. On all three bills the amount charged for the same electricity usage was different. In October a fourth bill arrived for £157.81. In vain did I repeat that it was npower which owed me money.
I’ve spent days on the phone but have got nowhere. SL, Malpas, Cheshire
Npower attempts the excuse that your meter has been changed, which it hasn’t, and then claims your meter was incorrectly identified in 2012.
Now it says the meter details hadn’t been updated – that is to say it apparently hadn’t got round to recording your final electricity reading, although it managed to with the higher than predicted gas one. It has refunded you the overpayments plus a goodwill gesture.
A London square whose wealthy residents have included Margaret Thatcher and Sean Connery has been crowned the most expensive in England and Wales with an average house price of nearly £17m.
Eaton Square, in the upmarket Belgravia district of west London, topped a list dominated by addresses in the capital, according to an annual survey by Lloyds Bank.
But the lender’s research also found that every region in England and Wales now has at least one “million-pound street”.
Built by the Grosvenor family in the 19th century, Eaton Square features grand homes and apartments featuring Grade II-listed white stucco facades.
It has been home to at least three prime ministers and two James Bonds, with Connery and Roger Moore both lending it a touch of 007 glamour, contributing to an average house price of £16.9m.
The sum is more than double last year’s highest average price of £8m, on Victoria Road in Kensington & Chelsea.
The bank said this did not reflect a broader surge in house prices, but was more likely to do with the small number of transactions in any given period, which means that one astronomical sale can distort the average.
One home on Eaton Square sold for £25m earlier this year, dragging the street’s average up, despite an overall slowdown in multimillion-pound house purchases.
At nearly £17m, the average price on the street is more than three times higher than in the most costly areas outside London, Weybridge and Leatherhead.
The two Surrey towns account for eight of the country’s top 20 priciest streets with Camp End Road in Weybridge at the top of the pile with an average house price of £5.2m.
But addresses in the capital dominate the list of the most expensive streets, with seven of the top 10 found in just two London boroughs, Westminster and Kensington.
While London dominates the list, the Lloyds research revealed that every region in England and Wales now has at least one street where the average house price is more than £1m.
Outside London and the south-east, the wealthiest addresses are those in, or close to the millionaires’ playground of Sandbanks in Poole on the Dorset south coast.
Panorama Road is the most exclusive address on the highly sought-after peninsula, with houses priced at £4.6m on average.
Crick Road in Oxford also scrapes into the top 20 at slightly more than £4m.
Altrincham in Greater Manchester is home to northern England’s highest house prices, at an average of £2m, followed by Leycester Road in Knutsford, Cheshire, at £1.79m.
Most of the north-east’s highest entries are in or near Newcastle, led by Runnymede Road in Ponteland, Northumberland, at £1.1m, while East Anglia’s list is topped by Storey’s Way in Cambridge at £1.9m.
The West Midlands is represented by Farquhar Road in Edgbaston (£1.4m), with the east Midlands not far behind at £1.3m for a home on Warren Hill in Newton Linford, Leicester.
The seaside resort of Llandudno takes top spot in Wales, with the average home on Llys Helyg Drive just squeezing in above the £1m mark.
Yorkshire and the Humber are dominated by the “Golden Triangle” between Harrogate, Wetherby and north Leeds, with Ling Lane in Leeds the most expensive at £1.3m.
In Devon and Cornwall, the city of Truro comes first, with homes on Restronguet Point selling for £1.8m.
Andrew Mason, mortgage director at Lloyds Bank, said: “Eaton Square, and prime central [London] locations such as Westminster, and Kensington and Chelsea, have established reputations as exclusive addresses.
“Not only do these streets possess a rich historical legacy, but properties located there are some of the most prestigious in the world and are close to superb local amenities in Knightsbridge, Sloane Street and Chelsea, as well as the capital’s business and entertainment districts.”
“Away from London, our figures show that the most expensive streets tend to be tightly clustered within pockets in the same area.
For example, the Edgbaston district in Birmingham, the Wilmslow and Altrincham areas in Cheshire, the so-called ’Golden Triangle’ in Yorkshire and the Humber and Sandbanks in Dorset on the south coast.”
The data was compiled from more than 1.7m postcodes, using Land Registry data for transactions between January 2011 and October 2016.
• This article was amended on 23 December 2016. An earlier version suggested incorrectly that Runnymede Road was in Newcastle.
Also, this was the year that Britain got a little bit richer, and how property ownership among 25-year-olds has plunged
Thousands of consumers may be holding worthless car hire bookings for the Christmas period after the company they booked through, Atlaschoice, apparently failed to pay firms providing the actual cars.
Customers of the website have reported being told at car hire desks that their booking would not be honoured unless they paid again – in some cases many hundreds of pounds – because Atlas had not paid the car’s actual provider.
Frustrated customers of the west London car hire booking firm, which acted as booking agent for all the big car hire brands, have reported the problem on Twitter and other social media in recent days.
“Cancelling my rental car, keeping my money and providing no other option two days before I fly home for Christmas. Seriously?” wrote Tom Richards on Twitter.
Another customer, Chris Clifton-Brown, wrote online: “Booked through them recently and when I turned up to collect my car the hire firm made me aware that Atlaschoice are not paying the actual hire firms. I had to pay the hire firm for the car again even though Atlaschoice have already taken my money.”
The company, which has been in business since 1990, did not return calls or reply to emails. The website was still operating, but not apparently taking new bookings.
Although Atlaschoice is not a household name many customers will have used the booking agent website via the popular TravelSupermarket comparison site – part of the MoneySupermarket group. It also partnered with a number of other big web-based travel businesses.
The Christmas period is traditionally one of the busiest for car hire operators, and many customers may be unable to pay for their car hire for a second time. 
A TravelSupermarket spokeswoman told the Guardian that it pulled Atlaschoice from its listings three weeks ago. “They missed paying us at the end of November and we couldn’t reach them so took them immediately off our site as a precautionary measure. Until then, there was no sign of financial difficulty and payments were up to date. We’ve called, emailed and sent a letter and continue to try and reach them but have not heard anything.”
She advised anyone with a car hire booking made through Atlaschoice to approach the company supplying the car to establish whether the booking has been paid for and would be honoured.
Customers should also contact their bank card provider. Credit users will be protected by section 75 rights that hold the card provider jointly liable provided the booking cost £100 or more. Debit card users may face a tougher battle to get their money back but could be refunded via a chargeback scheme, she said.
Atlaschoice failed to respond to the Guardian’s requests for comment.
The amount spent by shoppers using contactless cards and devices soared by 164% last year, in another record-breaking year for increasingly popular “touch and go” payments.
Half of Britons now pay by contactless payments at least once a month, according to the Barclaycard contactless spending index, while one in five (21%) are planning to increase their usage next year. The figures relate to payments handled by Barclaycard, which processes £1 of every £3 spent using payment cards in the UK.
Overall, London continues to lead the way for contactless usage, with almost half (47%) of all eligible transactions (up to the £30 limit) now being contactless – up from three in 10 in 2014. Spending in Manchester rose more than any other UK city – climbing 325% – with Glasgow, Blackpool, Hull and Edinburgh also seeing significant increases.
The UK’s pubs and bars enjoyed brisk trade with contactless payments surging 79%, and technology such as Barclaycard’s “Pay @ Pump” self-pouring beer pump is likely to mean more people paying for drinks in this way.
The news comes as the industry body the UK Cards Association (UKCA), reveals that the number of contactless debit and credit cards in the UK now tops 100m. A total of £2.8bn was spent using contactless cards in October – up 0.8% on September, with a record monthly spend of £55bn using plastic, the majority of which was on debit cards.
Tami Hargreaves, commercial director of digital consumer payments at Barclaycard, said: “As our data shows, Brits are turning to these payments for all types of purchases, from a supermarket top-up shop to stocking up on everyday essentials in discount stores and pharmacies.”
The increasing popularity of mobile payments and wearable devices such as the Apple Watch had also contributed to the surge in contactless payments, she added.
Contactless payment technology is being trialled for the first time in a scarf – by the merchant payment specialist Card Cutters – to help ease the Christmas shopping queues this festive period. Working the same way as contactless debit or credit cards, the “Swish and Pay” scarf is designed for the consumer already laden with bags at the checkout. Rather than rummaging for their wallet or purse, the consumer just drapes their scarf over the card terminal to make a swift and easy purchase.
The scarf uses the near field communication (NFC) technology used in debit and credit cards built into the material.
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
Housebuilders must halt leasehold sale of new houses, says minister
Home ownership among 25-year-olds in England and Wales has halved in 20 years
UK house price growth will slow to 3% in 2017, say surveyors
2016: the year Britain got (a little bit) richer
Many firms have had the steam coming out of your ears this year. We highlight the prize failures in Anna Tims’ awards for the worst customer service of 2016.
BT drops the ball and bills me for sport I don’t watch … and don’t want
How can a car hire firm take money from my card without authority?
We’re £15,500 out of pocket after a Lloyds blunder over house sale
If you’re planning to send money overseas for Christmas get competitive exchange rates and free online currency transfers from Moneycorp, provider of the Guardian money transfer service.
Save 10% on annual and single trip Guardian travel insurance, provided by Voyager, until 31 January 2017 – quote WIN10 to claim your discount.
Money Talks will be sent out again in the new year. Have a very happy Christmas.
As Christmas nears, and output slows, you’re always within six feet of a really grumpy person with a hangover, and many of us are beginning our annual festive slowdown. Office workers aren’t so much phoning it in as wandering away from their desks whenever their phones go off.
In my local supermarket yesterday, I spotted one employee riding up and down the frozen foods aisle while hanging off the side of a cage on wheels, singing “Have a Holly Jolly Christmas” while using a pricing gun as a microphone. Some of our colleagues were last spotted at the bar in Wetherspoon’s at 8pm, on the day of the work Christmas lunch, telling anyone who would listen that 2017 might be the year that they got “really into” Pernod.
While the majority of the working population manages to stay fairly professional for at least 11 months of the year, a few apply December Rules all year round. When you have a “proper” job, there’s always some temptation to behave improperly, and the more boundaries we push, the more relaxed we get about breaking the rules. No one minds the first time you’re five minutes late and panicking breathlessly, so next time it’s 10 minutes, and you stroll in clutching a coffee. You take a long, wine-fuelled lunch with your boss – then a longer, boozier one when your boss is away on holiday.
Suddenly you’re wondering whether it’s OK to take the Post-its home for personal use. Or if you’re Robin Pyke – a former housekeeper – whether you can drive your employer’s Porsche without permission (according to its owner, at least), have your boyfriend over and moonlight as a dogsitter on company property, in company time.
Pyke successfully sued his employers for unfair dismissal, after a tribunal ruled that they didn’t follow the correct procedures in letting him go. Does this mean there’s hope for those workers who might already be worried that they’ve “gone a bit far” this month? Will we all be able to look the boss in the eye on Friday when we wish them a final merry Christmas?
As a former office junior, and a fan of Mad Men, I’ve noticed that those who are the most badly behaved at work are usually the ones with the most power, or at least, an office with a lock on the door. Slacking off is a privilege to be earned. The trick is to know when you’ve been with an organisation long enough to start bending the rules – and to work out when you’ve stayed for too long. Your shortcuts turn into risks and you have to worry about whether you’re going to get yourself sacked, just to stay interested.
Bosses are human beings, and they have the same priorities as the rest of us during December. They just want to get through the month with minimal fuss, avoid any mention of secret Santa and be able to sit in their chair to rest their eyes at 4pm without question or comment. They don’t care what you do as long as it doesn’t disturb this routine. Being late the morning after the Christmas party probably isn’t an issue. Trying on your Asos deliveries in the back boardroom on a very quiet afternoon might be OK. Anything that is going to get you hauled up in front of HR, requiring them to go into that boardroom to tell you off will interrupt their own quiet, lazy routine and make them furious.
Ultimately it’s all about the difference between winding down for Christmas, and winding everyone else up. December marks the end of a long, challenging year. If we began it bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, resolving to give 110%, it’s only natural to end it feeling burned out, less than bothered and running at 90% or less. Laziness is forgivable. But if you’re bored, and using the festive slowdown to cause chaos, break clearly defined rules and make everything more difficult for your colleagues, you should probably start looking for a new job in the new year – and not just because you’re on the brink of being fired.
No one can be bothered to rock the boat in December, so your employers will probably overlook all but the most serious slip-ups. If you’ve got enough creative energy to make them angry, you probably have talents and ambitions that could be better fulfilled in a different workplace.
Urgently needing some new glass for windows in my house, I Googled local window companies, and found one called Emergency Response Group.
I gave the measurements and it quoted me £400 to replace six windows. I agreed as I needed the work doing fast. It took my card details, which would be charged once the windows were replaced.
When the glaziers showed up they said two of our windows needed safety glass (something not mentioned on the phone) and that they would have to come back. They suggested this would happen within the next week.
We then heard nothing, so I assumed they had lost interest.
Later that month I checked my credit card statement and £54 had been debited by Emergency Response Group, which said this was a “cancellation fee”. I wasn’t told about this fact before and, more importantly, I hadn’t cancelled.
After about 20 fruitless phone calls, I just want my £54 back, but am getting nowhere. KM, Hale, Cheshire
Google this company directly by name and you will soon see that you are not the only person to be frustrated after hiring this Essex-based firm, which appears to subcontract much of its work.
It has a 1.2/5 Google star rating and the recent, highly critical comments posted by customers would not inspire anyone to hand over their credit card details to this firm.
I asked the company about your experience and it claimed that it had called you with the new price for the extra work and, rather strangely, that it had not heard from you. As a result it had charged you its £54 call-out fee, which it says is clearly set out in its terms and conditions. It has now offered to refund half that as a gesture of goodwill.
In your shoes I would be inclined to take the partial refund, put it down to experience and find another firm to replace the windows.
It is always worth reviewing unheard-of companies before signing up – a further 30 seconds on the web would have saved you a lot of time and wasted effort.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
A hospice charity signed a deal with a direct marketing agency that could have resulted in hospices receiving less than 2% of £5.4m raised from the public, according to a Charity Commission report.
Hospice Aid UK agreed a seven-year deal with Piccadilly-based marketers Euro DM that resulted in the public being “misled” over how much money would be given to hospices. Since the Charity Commission stepped in, the agency has agreed to pay back £325,000.
The case is likely to raise concerns about the fundraising strategies used by some charities, some of which result in high management costs.
Hospice Aid UK was set up to raise money and then pass it on to hospices across the country. However, the Charity Commission began looking at the charity after it only passed on 1.9% of its income to hospices in 2012. In that year, the charity raised £132,023, but only made grants worth £2,557.
In the same year, Hospice Aid UK entered into the contract with Euro DM, which uses specialist direct marketing to target potential donors. Euro DM, which operates out of both London and Washington DC, boasts about its tactics on its website.
It lists a five-step programme, which starts with attracting “large members [sic] of new donors, using the latest direct marketing methods and techniques”. The donors’ loyalty is then consolidated “with proven relationship-building communications”. It then introduces donors to “regular and Gift Aid giving”. High-value donors are placed on “special development programmes”.
The final step is to identify “genuine legacy gift prospects and draw them towards this vital way of giving through a combination of education and promotion contracts.”
The donations have not so far reached the projected income. In 2014, Hospice Aid UK raised £537,211 and passed on 5.3% in grants. Last year, it raised £647,270 and passed on 4.7%. While the Institute of Fundraising says that it is not possible to give a general benchmark for return on investment “because there are so many factors that will vary year on year and organisation to organisation”, the Charity Commission said that the public was entitled to expect “a significantly higher proportion of donations” to reach Hospice Aid UK.
According to the report, the charity’s former trustees failed to take suitable legal advice before entering into the contract with the fundraising agency.
The contract then gave the charity “no practical means by which to terminate the agreement, which given it was for a duration of 7 years and it was intended to generate the principal source of income for the charity, was of particular concern”. The Charity Commission has now referred the case to the Fundraising Regulator.
Hospice Aid UK said that its problems raising money effectively had begun after a second charity, the much larger Hospice UK, raised concerns about it about eight years ago, creating “reputational damage”.
The British division of Euro DM is managed by Kim Way. Way said that the negative publicity around Hospice Aid UK had reduced its fundraising potential. “The solicitors who drafted our basic contract had extensive experience working with charities and we would hope they avoided provisions that would make it appear unfavourable to a charity,” she said. “They were particularly insistent on including a provision for termination should specific goals not be met.”
Way added that each contract was based on the needs and circumstances of the client and that Euro DM was confused that the Charity Commission had focused on their work.
Michelle Russell, the director of investigations, monitoring and enforcement at the Charity Commission, said that the case was a clear reminder to all charities of the importance of their legal responsibilities when fundraising. “This is a case where we believe poor financial oversight and a failure to adequately control costs and overheads was an instrumental factor in the deteriorating financial position and where a fundraising arrangement was not only not in the charity’s best interests, [but meant] that the public believed more money was going to charitable causes than was the case.”
In a statement, Hospice Aid UK said that the contract with the fundraising agency “still has several years to run after which a judgment can be made.”
There have been several recent controversies over fundraising strategies used by charities, including selling of donors’ personal data to scamming companies and obtaining donations from vulnerable people using undue pressure.
Q We are looking to move up the housing ladder and have managed to save £60,000. However, we are struggling to find a house we like so it may be another year or two before we move. The issue is that we are coming out of our five-year fixed rate on our current mortgage in April and all the numbers suggest that it would be better to remortgage than stay on the lender’s standard rate. Is it best to use some of our savings (maybe £20,000-£30,000) to lower our remortgage or keep the money until we amend our mortgage for the new house?
I am just confused if lowering our current mortgage is the same as having more equity for our new house. My gut says lowering the current mortgage is best overall with the reduction in debt and interest paid, but I am worried I am mixing it up and all the other advice out there doesn’t seem to cover this area. SJ
A With interest rates paid on savings as pitifully low as they are, putting savings towards overpaying a mortgage makes perfect sense – but only if you can do so without paying a penalty. And then only if you don’t have any other more expensive debts such as an outstanding balance on a credit card. If you do, it makes more sense to pay off these debts before reducing the amount of your mortgage.
If, however, a mortgage is your only loan, it is worth investigating how much you are allowed to pay off without an early repayment charge. With a lot of variable-rate deals, you will be charged a fee if you make overpayments in the first two to three years of having the mortgage although several lenders – such as Coventry building society, First Direct and Nationwide – have no early repayment charges on their variable-rate deals. However, you will invariably find that overpayments on fixed-rate mortgages will trigger a fee if made within the fixed-rate period. But there may not be a fee if your lender allows you to overpay a certain amount each year – typically no more than 10% of the original loan amount or outstanding balance but the limit can also be a percentage of the monthly repayment.
Once the fixed-rate period comes to an end, the threat of an early repayment charge may also disappear but lenders vary so you need to check the terms of your mortgage carefully. Assuming you can overpay without paying a fee, it it would seem sensible to make the overpayment as you remortgage. That way, it may mean that you have access to better mortgage deals available to people who need to borrow less than 75% or 65% of the value of their property.
Assuming you can pay off £20,000 to £30,000 – while wisely keeping half your savings back for emergencies – tying up a proportion of your cash in property will both cut your costs and increase the equity in your current home. When you come to sell your home, less of the sale proceeds will be needed to pay off your current mortgage and more will be available to put towards your next home.
The proportion of 25-year-olds who own a home has more than halved over the past 20 years, according to a report that points to the generational impact of the housing crisis.
Home ownership has dropped from 46% of all 25-year-olds two decades ago to 20% now, the Local Government Association said.
The LGA, which represents more than 370 councils in England and Wales, said more homes for affordable or social rent are needed to allow people to save up for a deposit and get on the housing ladder.
The LGA’s housing spokesman, Cllr Martin Tett, said: “Our figures show just how wide the generational home ownership gap is in this country. A shortage of houses is a top concern for people as homes are too often unavailable, unaffordable and not appropriate for the different needs in our communities.
“The housing crisis is complex and is forcing difficult choices on families, distorting places, and hampering growth. But there is a huge opportunity, as investment in building the right homes in the right places has massive wider benefits for people and places.”
Analysis for the LGA by the estate agent Savills found that the construction of social rented homes – owned and managed by local authorities and housing associations – plunged by 88% between 1995-96 and 2015-16. The association warned that the sharp fall, combined with rents rising at a faster pace than incomes, meant that home ownership was becoming more difficult for an increasing number of people.
Home ownership across all age groups has fallen by 4.4% since 2008, while private renters increased by 5.1%, the LGA said.
Council leaders also warned of an urgent need to provide more homes suitable for Britain’s ageing population, which would help reduce demand for NHS provision and other care services.
The government is expected to reveal how it plans to address Britain’s housing shortage and boost supply in a housing white paper in January. Tett said local councils would have a crucial role to play.
“There is no silver bullet and everyone must come together to meet the diverse housing needs in our villages, towns and cities,” he said. “The government’s housing white paper is an opportunity to boost housing supply and affordability. It must recognise that a renaissance in housebuilding by councils will be crucial to helping ensure the mix of homes to rent and buy that are affordable for those people that need them.
“This means powers and funding given to councils to replace sold homes and reinvest in building more of the genuinely affordable homes our communities desperately need.”
The LGA’s housing commission has set out more than 30 recommendations for how local and national government could work together to address the nation’s housing challenges.
The proposals include freeing councils from restrictions on their borrowing in order to help them build more affordable homes; making it easier for councils to purchase land ready for home building; and ensuring funding is available to enable older people to modify their own home.
Tired of long hours at the office? Irritated by your colleagues? The end of the year is a time for reflection, and if you’re looking back on another 12 months of feeling fed up with your employer, you’re probably contemplating switching jobs. The worry, though, is that any change could simply involve a different desk but more of the same.
Consultancy might be one option worth exploring. This could involve providing professional services such as doing legal, finance, management or public relations work for a company on a short-term basis, providing advice or working with a business’s clients. Alternatively, you could be expected to bring in your own clients with some sort of fee-sharing deal in place.
But whatever the consultancy arrangement, before you take the leap it’s important to think about your contacts and connections. Think about who might pass business your way – you will probably need to have a number of potential revenue sources in mind rather than planning to rely on income from one or two clients, which may be risky. If the business doesn’t materialise or later disappears for any reason, you could be left high and dry. Even when the consultancy role you have chosen for yourself wouldn’t require you to bring in business, it’s still sensible to ask yourself: who can I count on in the industry?
When you are planning this move, make sure you are allowed to do this kind of work and with the clients you have in mind. Your contract with your current employer may include post-termination restrictions that may prohibit you for a certain period from setting up in competition, or poaching or working with your employer’s clients. The general rule is that the restriction will only be legally enforceable if it goes no further than necessary to protect the firm’s legitimate business interests.
Then there is the issue of financial security. You ought to have some savings to tide you over for the periods when you’re building up revenue and for between contracts. If you have high fixed costs each month, such as a mortgage, think twice before making the move. Also, bear in mind that consultants do miss out on certain rights and benefits, which could include paid holiday, sick pay, pensions, private health cover and permanent health insurance.
But it would be a mistake to assume that moving to a new job as an employee will always be more secure than going it alone. Many employers require staff to pass a probationary period during which notice on either side could be just one week. And even after making the grade, in the first two years that you are with an organisation the employer can normally dismiss you as long as adequate notice has been given. Employees with at least two years’ service have the general right not to be unfairly dismissed, and then employers must dismiss for a fair reason (such as capability, misconduct or redundancy) and follow a proper process.
If you are a consultant and only being paid for income generated you’re not a fixed cost. Therefore in lean times the business may be less likely to sever the relationship than if it had to pay you a guaranteed salary.
You probably have the opportunity to earn more as a freelancer, and there may be tax advantages to consultancy, particularly if it’s carried out through a service company. Beware of IR35 legislation, though, which is designed to tax disguised employment. This is where an individual receives payments from a client via an intermediary and the relationship is such that had the person been paid directly they would be an employee of the client.
Perhaps the biggest attraction of being a consultant is that it allows greater flexibility. There is far more choice in terms of hours and days worked as well as where the work is done. While it’s true that all employees with 26 weeks of service can request to work flexibly, employers have plenty of scope to refuse. Consultants also tend to be able to work for other companies during the consultancy, whereas employers are usually stricter about allowing employees to work elsewhere. So if you’re feeling boxed in at work, consultancy might be the way out.
Matt Gingell is a partner at Gannons Solicitors and specialises in employment law
In a recent article for this section, Faiza Shaheen described recruitment agencies as “arbiters of capitalism and the mass exploitation of workers”. As someone who has owned a recruitment agency in London for 30 years, I would endorse her view.
The recruitment industry is growing at an annual rate of 9%: an astonishing speed for a mature industry that now exceeds £35bn in annual turnover – larger than the food and drink industries – and within which 1.2 million people find work. Much of this growth is, however, easily explained. In combining aggressive tax avoidance with systematic worker exploitation, recruitment agencies are able to supply labour at prices far below the cost of direct employment by labour users. Within the industry, the culprits are widely known and, usually, highly successful.
Tax avoidance has always been a staple of the agency world. Until April, the most widely used and profitable angle was the use of travel and subsistence schemes, which allowed agencies to claim weekly tax rebates on behalf of their temporary workers. Having done so, the agencies would then snaffle most, or all, of those rebates. These schemes enabled the most ruthless operators to accrue huge profits. Their temporary workers would then lose year-end rebates to which they would otherwise have been entitled.
HMRC inactivity has been the main facilitator of the recruitment industry’s care-free tax avoidance. Time and again, HMRC has issued statements condemning sharp practices; time and again the perpetrators have ignored them and continued to prosper. Indeed, every time recruitment industry tax avoidance is highlighted in the media, copycat schemes flourish.
No one in the recruitment industry believes that HMRC has the will to take it to task. A senior HMRC inspector told me five years ago that over £1bn per year was being siphoned from Revenue and Customs into the hands of agency bosses through travel scheme abuse alone – yet, with the exception of a £158m tax bill imposed on Reed Employment, the industry’s manipulation of the tax system has hardly been disturbed.
The Guardian recently exposed payroll “products” that have become more widespread since travel and subsistence schemes were banned, enabling agencies to effectively opt out of employers’ national insurance contributions. These are by no means the only options being used. My inbox is constantly assaulted by “payroll solutions” being offered by umbrella companies, few of which offer more than crude tax avoidance. Typically, these “solutions” arrive from newly formed companies with no track record, and whose activities often cease before they need to file annual accounts.
In order to succeed in the race to the bottom that characterises the agency world, however, it is not enough merely to game the tax system. Workers are likely to face greater exploitation as agencies offer ever tighter prices to their customers. Holiday pay is reduced, withheld, or denied altogether. Worthless personal accident insurance policies are peddled at vastly inflated prices. Rights to equal pay with permanent counterparts after 12 weeks are easily dodged by deft drafting of contracts. Self-employment is forced upon people who fulfil none of the criteria and have no knowledge of what it entails. Workforces are juggled to minimise employers’ NI contributions. Workers frequently have no idea who they are actually working for, with labyrinthine networks of companies established to evade any chance of prosecution.
Recruitment agencies are not solely responsible for these practices. Users of labour are usually complicit, and often instrumental in insisting on labour prices that cannot mathematically be achieved without denying rights and avoiding tax. As one leading lawyer who specialises in the recruitment industry told me: “I used to think companies used agencies because they added expertise and value. I now realise they use them because they’re cheap.”
While successive governments have increased workers’ rights in theory, they have not policed those rights, nor ensured that they cannot be easily dodged. There is no regulatory body that actively enforces agency workers’ rights, other than the Gangmasters’ Licensing Authority. By common consent, this body works well, and its remit is set to expand in 2017. However, a budget of £4.5m a year is hopelessly inadequate to fight corruption within such a large industry.
Trade bodies representing the recruitment industry live in denial of their members’ behaviour. The press office of the industry’s largest trade organisation, the Recruitment and Employment Confederation, failed to acknowledge the recent front page Guardian expose, or address the calls of various MPs for government to urgently look into the industry. Instead, its next website article was headlined “Why the recruitment industry needs to talk itself up”. Despite growing adverse publicity, the silence from industry stakeholders is deafening.
There are many ways in which recruitment agencies can make a positive contribution. Temporary work is likely to increase as society evolves. Agencies that provide a real service in recruiting, organising and administering workforces perform a key function in an increasingly reactive world. There are plenty of organisations using agency labour who realise that a workforce that is well-treated and properly paid will be more reliable and productive than one that is systematically exploited. Where such organisations dovetail with agencies holding similar views, real benefits can accrue to industry and workers alike.
Theresa May’s government has claimed that it will represent those who struggle to get by; it has also targeted tax avoidance. In turning its attention to the recruitment industry, it could address both aims and provide a significant boost to workers, tax receipts and those recruitment companies who are appalled by the direction the industry has taken. What is certain is that the recruitment industry will not reform itself. If government does not take firm and sustained action, the industry will continue to grow at breakneck speed, with the most grateful beneficiaries being those whose snouts remain most deeply in the trough.
As you take a train home for Christmas over the next few days, spare a thought for those of us who make sure you’re not sitting in the remains of the last passenger’s mince pie. I work as a cleaner for Great Western Railway – albeit via an agency they use to employ us, Servest UK. Last week we travelled to the GWR head office to challenge the company over our terrible terms and conditions.
When I’m too sick to work, I have two choices: either I use my annual leave allowance or I don’t get paid. If I don’t get paid, I can’t pay my rent, so I have to borrow money from a payday loan company. If I borrow money it’s difficult to earn enough to pay it back – but for me it’s worse to waste annual leave because then I can’t use it to go home and visit my family.
Some people doing exactly the same job as me don’t have this problem. When they’re ill they’re entitled to sick pay and aren’t forced to get into debt. All of us clean for GWR, but only some of us are employed directly by the company – 350 of us, including me, technically work for Servest UK. Same job, different working conditions.
The contractor’s agreement with GWR lasts for three years. After that, different companies can bid for the contract and attempt to provide the same cleaning services for less money. There are two ways they can do that: either they make fewer staff do more work or they pay everyone less money. The way things are set up it’s always the workers who lose out. Ultimately, GWR must take the blame for the unequal standards that cleaning staff on their trains must work to – they make the decision to put cleaning work out to tender. But the company tells us that it’s not its concern how the agency chooses to treat its staff.
I joined the RMT trade union and travelled with dozens of other agency cleaners last week to force the company to take responsibility for how we’re treated. We delivered a petition to a company director and we’re hoping he will meet us to discuss what is happening. We want to show him that we are serious.
We want the same rights as people who are employed by GWR directly. Sick pay is the most important thing for many of us, but we also want the Christmas and new year bonuses that all those directly employed by GWR get. Some of us haven’t been able to visit our families for 18 months and we want annual leave entitlements to match those of our fellow cleaners who don’t work for Servest.
For some people, things are even worse than they are for me. Even though they have cleaned GWR trains for years, they are agency workers with zero-hours contracts and have barely any rights at all.
GWR also needs to look into complaints by staff within the agency team, which so far neither they nor Servest have properly investigated. It is not acceptable for neither company to take responsibility for incidents that occurred prior to Servest taking over the contract. For the people there, it doesn’t matter whether it’s Servest UK or the previous contractor, the issues are still the same.
This is why we travelled to the GWR head office, and it’s why we are striking on Christmas Eve, because ultimately they are the company we clean for, regardless of what it says on our payslip. The trains we clean have GWR written on their side. We work hard at our jobs and all we’re asking is that they listen to us and make sure we’re treated fairly.
Like most people who find themselves homeless, Lee Davies, a 24-year-old from Plymouth who now sleeps rough in London, was kicked out of his home due to the end of an assured-shorthold tenancy. The most recent government statistics show that a third of all households in England made homeless, 40% in London, were due to a landlord ending a tenancy – up from 11% of all cases in 2009. With the rise of private renting, the precarity of the tenure has been reflected in the cases councils see in their homelessness applications.
When Davies approached his local authority for help finding accommodation, he found little sympathy: on one occasion, he was informed that as a single young man he was low priority; on another advised to rent another property, despite the fact he had no money for a deposit; and on a third visit, told he was “intentionally homeless” because he could have found somewhere else to live after his landlord had given him notice. Finally, he gave up, relying on friends’ sofas – but eventually his friends’ patience ran out.
At that point, he found a novel way of finding places to sleep. “If I went on Grindr, I could meet men who had their own flats and offer to spend the night with them. Then I could have a shower, charge my phone, and go out,” he tells me. “I didn’t like some of the guys, but the alternative was sleeping in shop doorways, so it was all about weighing up the pros and cons.”
But then Davies’s phone was stolen and this lifeline was cut off. Now he has no way to contact friends and family, and sleeps rough in central London. “At least when I could still get online, I could pretend this was temporary and that everything was fine; but now no one knows where I am, and if they wanted to find me, they couldn’t.” He has bruises on his neck, from a few nights ago when he slept in a doorway near a cashpoint and a drunk man in a suit kicked him repeatedly while swearing at him.
Davies’s situation is not unique, and is becoming increasingly common. The government’s most recent figures, from autumn 2015, estimate that there are 3,569 rough sleepers on any one night in England – more than double the number in autumn 2010, when it was 1,768. And sources told the Observer this month that this year’s count, which has only just finished, is likely to be higher again.
In cities around the country, homelessness has increased visibly, with many more people on the streets. The highest rates of rough sleeping are in Westminster, Bristol and Brighton and Hove, the government’s figures suggest. Manchester has the fourth highest rate of street homelessness and Adam Williams, office manager at Barnabus, a Christian homelessness charity in Manchester, says the number of people requesting their services has never been higher than this year. “People are visibly affected when they visit Manchester at the moment, especially if they haven’t been here for a few years. However, my fear is that people will become desensitised to the situation [so many people sleeping rough] and that within a year it will just become a normal state of affairs in most people’s eyes,” he says.
Howard Sinclair, chief executive of homelessness charity St Mungo’s, concurs with Williams. “This year saw an alarming rise in the number of people who are facing the extreme dangers of sleeping rough.”
The charity’s report on homelessness earlier this year, Stop the Scandal, identified multiple reasons why rough sleeping remains a stubborn problem, even though all street homeless people should have access to a shelter. A lack of specialist mental health provision was the main issue raised: four out of 10 people who homelessness workers came into contact with had at least one mental health problem, yet 86% reported a lack of beds for people with mental health issues. Causes include funding cuts, services disappearing entirely, and rough sleepers with both mental health problems and substance abuse histories finding it nearly impossible to access services.
The report calculates that on average, local authority funding for services for helping vulnerable people avoid homelessness was cut by 45% between 2009-10 and 2014-15. Last week’s local government finance settlement is unlikely to inspire confidence in the sector – the Local Government Association estimates that councils face a £5.8bn funding gap by 2020.
In winter, sleeping rough can easily mean death: the average age of death for a homeless woman is 43, and for a homeless man 46, compared with a national average of 77. Last month, an unidentified homeless man was found dead behind Birmingham New Street station. In the same month, Birmingham council announced it was cutting £10m from the £24m Supporting People budget, designed to help homeless and vulnerable people.
Birmingham’s decision is symptomatic of the funding crisis facing local authorities. Persistent cuts to housing-related budgets by Oxford county council have led several homelessness charities in the area to warn they will be forced to close shelters without funding. Volunteers can only plug the gap partially: without targeted funding, it becomes impossible to run effective homelessness services.
Once people end up sleeping rough, it is extremely difficult to gain access to housing: Davies cannot work or claim benefits as he has no fixed address and he does not have the identification documents to apply for a simple payment card, can’t contact friends without turning up on their doorsteps and tells me he feels he “has completely dropped out of society”, whereas before he had a low-paid job, but a home and a small social safety net.
Bill Jenkins, a 38-year old, has been street homeless for two years after leaving his home when he broke up with his wife. When the council told him he wasn’t a priority, he “lost it, thought I’d ruined my entire life, just drank all day to calm myself down and have been sleeping rough since.” He feels that sleeping rough is an insurmountable obstacle to re-entering society and getting his life back on track.
Last week, the Labour party said it would double the number of housing association homes earmarked for rough sleepers in a bid to tackle the problem. And across the border from England, there may be a solution. The Welsh approach to homelessness focuses on prevention rather than forcing households to wait until they are homeless before being entitled to help, and does not deprioritise single young people like Davies: if Lee were in Wales, it’s highly unlikely he’d be sleeping in a telephone box each night.
Jon Sparkes, chief executive of Crisis, is wholly enthusiastic about the approach, which the current homelessness reduction bill seeks to bring to English local authorities. “Prevention is better than cure, and for homeless people this is especially so. It has already been shown to work in Wales, where it has dramatically reduced the need for people to be rehoused and helped to reduce the amount councils spend on temporary accommodation. We now need similar change in England,” he says.
With cross-party support and, crucially, the financial backing to enact the policy’s aims, the homelessness reduction bill could make a real difference, although the Local Government Association, and former housing ministers Mark Prisk and John Healey, have warned that without millions of pounds of funding from central government, the aims of the bill cannot be realised. Davies’s immediate situation looks bleak, but he remains positive: “I’m still young, and some people have offered help purely because it’s Christmas. I’m spending Christmas weekend in a hostel, and they’ve got advisers there, so I want to see if I can get back on track, and back into the system. Get my life back, really.”
Some names have been changed
The UK faces the risk next year of a return to the squeeze in real pay suffered earlier in the decade as higher prices and a stalling of jobs growth puts living standards under pressure, a thinktank has warned.
The Resolution Foundation – which concentrates on the living standards of those on low to middle incomes – said 2015-16 had been the fastest year of real wage growth since 2001 but said the combination of low inflation and strongly rising employment would not be repeated.
Torsten Bell, the foundation’s director, said 2016 was “getting a bad press” but added: “We may well come to look back at 2016 with fond nostalgia – not least given what 2017 looks set to have to offer. The issue is not that last year was awful, more that it risks being as good as it gets.”
The foundation’s analysis of official ONS data shows that the 3% increase in non-pensioner household incomes in 2015-16 was evenly shared, with all parts of the income distribution seeing growth of over 2%.
Bell said 2014-15 had also been a strong year for real income growth. “Very rapid employment growth coupled with near zero inflation created a solid living standards recovery over the past few years, with the added bonus for low earners of the national living wage more recently.”
He added that the strong recent performance had to be set against the unprecedented squeeze on real incomes during the deep recession of 2008-09 and the years that followed.
However, Bell said neither of the two factors that had caused living standards to rise over the past two years would be repeated in 2017. Employment growth had slowed to a trickle in recent months as the labour market entered a holding pattern in the spring.
“The good news is that employment remains close to record highs at over 75% and firms are by and large not planning on shrinking their workforces,” Bell said. “The bad news is that without further employment growth in 2017 one of the big boosts to household incomes of recent years (more people working and earning) will weaken. That leaves other determinants of income growth to pick up the slack. Unfortunately they look set to do the opposite.”
Bell said ultra-low inflation had been the other factor boosting living standards but that prices were now starting to rise rapidly, with the result that the UK was “on course for fast, significant and repeated falls in real earnings growth early in the new year.
“This earnings freefall means we expect wage growth to fall to around 1% in the three months to January – the slowest real wage rises in over two years. With inflation forecast to continue rising we project real earnings growth hovering around, or even below, zero for the second half of the year. A return to the pay squeeze we thought we had left behind in 2014 is a real risk.”
The words ‘the economy’ weren’t mentioned in a winning British election manifesto before 1950. But today, says Catriona Watson of Rethinking Economics, politicians put it front and centre of their politics. This is undemocratic, she argues, when it is discussed in terms most of us cannot understand
Last February, I went to the Preston branch of DW Fitness on a day pass, with a view to renewing my previously ended membership. I filled out a membership form with the manager, leaving out my bank details.
In the end, I decided that the gym had not improved since I was a member and, as a result, I wasn’t going to go back. I told them this on the phone.
In May, I discovered payments had been taken out of my bank account. It seems someone at the firm took my bank details from my previous membership and activated my account.
I went to the bank to explain what had happened and have been refunded. However, now the company has called in debt collectors to chase me. DA, Preston
This is the latest in a long list of complaints we have received about DW Fitness – a company that also suffers from poor online reviews. The complaints to us have slowed but continue to come in.
In fairness to the company, it has listened and appears to have taken steps to treat customers trying to exit contracts more reasonably.
In this case, it denies your version of events. It says you had paid a joining fee in cash, that you had not had your bank details on you and so they were pulled off the system and that you signed the form.
It is hard to know what really happened, but what is important is that the company has now called off the debt collectors and you are relieved.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Gritstone edges and limestone outcrops loom over this village in the Peak District national park and if you’re too full of festive feasting to haul yourself up to those heights, you can amble along the Derwent river, which flows past this 18th-century cottage. Or you could hike in your mind’s eye from your bed, which overlooks woods and moorland. There are only two bedrooms, although you could redivide the large master chamber. It sits in half an acre of waterside gardens. Offers in the region of £525,000. Onthemarket.com , 01433 328987
UK house price growth will slow in 2017 but the legacy of insufficient housebuilding will mean that demand will outstrip supply and lead to a 3% rise over the year, surveyors have predicted.
Although the most bullish housing market forecast for the new year released so far, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors said it expected growth to be about half that in 2016. A year ago, it predicted price rises of 6% and official figures are on track to meet that, with October’s annual growth rate at 6.9%.
Rics said it expected supply issues to continue to drive prices upwards over the next 12 months. “Following on from the 2016 forecast, the supply pipeline or lack of it is at the forefront of the analysis and dominates the residential market,” it said. “While there is an improvement, the legacy of building on an insufficient scale has left the average inventory on estate agents’ books close to a historic low.”
Since June’s referendum, Rics members around the UK have reported a fall in the number of homes coming on to the market, while would-be buyers have continued to register their interest. This has been backed up by figures from mortgage lenders, which showed a 20% fall in the number of loans to home movers in October.
Rics said the number of sales was set to fall slightly from 2016’s figure, from about 1.25m to between 1.15m and 1.2m, reflecting a downwards trend over recent months.
The organisation said it expected East Anglia to have price rises above the national average, alongside the north-west of England and the West Midlands. Separate figures from the property website Zoopla showed that the east of England had seen prices rise by 12% in 2016, with the Norfolk town of Diss recording the biggest increase over the year. The West Midlands was the second-placed in its rankings, with growth of almost 9%.
Prices in central London look set to stabilise after recent falls, Rics said, with the weak pound encouraging foreign buyers into the market. Meanwhile, across the UK rents are forecast to increase by between 2% and 3% and Rics said that they could rise more quickly than house prices over the next five years. In London, it said growth would be more modest in 2017, predicting rents could flatline or rise by up to 1% over the year.
The Rics chief economist, Simon Rubinsohn, said: “Although recent announcements by the government on housing are very welcome, the ongoing shortfall of stock across much of the sales and lettings markets is set to continue to underpin prices and rents. As a result, the affordability challenge will remain very much to the fore for many.
“Meanwhile, the lack of existing inventory in the market is impacting the ability of households to move and will contribute toward transaction activity over the whole of 2017 being a little lower that in the year just ending.”
Many of the biggest players in the property industry have now published their forecasts for 2017. Property firm Savills has suggested that prices will remain flat across the UK, and fall in the north of England, Wales and Scotland. In the east of England it expects 2.5% growth. On Monday, the UK’s largest building society, Nationwide, said it expected the UK average price to increase by 2% over the year, below the rate of growth it has reported in 2016. It had forecast growth between 4% and 6% this year, and at the end of November said year-on-year growth had slowed to 4.4%.
Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said: “Like most forecasters, including the Bank of England, we expect the UK economy to slow modestly next year, which is likely to result in less robust labour market conditions and modestly slower house price growth.
“But we continue to think a small gain (around 2%) is more likely than a decline over 2017 as a whole, since low interest rates are expected to help underpin demand while a shortage of homes on the market will continue to provide support for house prices.”
The government is due to publish its long-awaited housing white paper in January, which will address the shortfall in supply in all types of homes, including rental properties and social housing. The Rics head of policy, Jeremy Blackburn, said this would be a “defining moment”. He said: “Whilst the system based on large, private housing developers and homes for owner occupation has increased house building, it’s not delivering. The UK needs a coordinated strategy for building across tenures, using all of the delivery and technology mechanisms at our disposal.”
Gardner said: “The major housebuilders appear to have capacity to expand output, with most reporting land banks that could support around five years’ worth of construction at current rates of building activity. However, there is a risk that the uncertain economic outlook may weigh on activity in the period ahead.”
]It’s an idea whose time has come. Around the world, the impact investing movement is coming of age, and it is getting increased attention in Australia.
The movement encompasses investors such as superannuation funds, banks, fund managers, foundations and governments, all seeking financial returns while using capital to solve pressing social and/or environmental issues. This could be in areas such as affordable housing, healthcare and renewable energy. And it’s also capturing the imaginations and hearts of those looking for ways to align their assets with their values.
But there’s more to be done. In Sydney last month, I spoke at the Impact Investment Summit Asia Pacific and spent the week hearing from those building the market in the region. There were a number of stand out points that made me realise while there is plenty happening in this sector, it’s time for more Australians to get on board with impact investing.
Australia – an island country facing significant environmental threats in areas such as water security, coastal flooding, and agriculture – already understands far too well the dangers of inaction when it comes to climate change.
With a focus on renewable energy, conservation strategies, and water markets, investors in the region are taking a stand against climate change. I was particularly inspired by New Forests, a fund manager with more than US$2.3bn in assets under management focused on sustainable strategies in forestry, land management and conservation.
It’s also heartening to see the development of specialised vehicles, such as the Australian Balanced Water Fund, launched by NatureVest. The US$20m fund is the first impact investment-driven solution in Australia to use markets to balance the water needs of farmers, communities and nature.
The increased focus on environment is a trend seen around the globe. Data from the Global Impact Investing Network’s (GIIN) 2016 Annual Impact Investor Survey show a 25% increase in the number of investors that seek to have an environmental impact, either through operational improvements or through the products and services their investees sell. We need more investors to prioritise fighting climate change through their portfolios. Seeking out and executing on environmentally focused investments is necessary if we are to protect the planet.
Having seen how the industry has evolved and grown in other countries, such as the Netherlands, the UK and the US, it’s apparent that collaboration is a critical element of success. It is encouraging to see such multi-stakeholder collaboration in Australia under the guidance of groups such as Impact Investing Australia, which builds key infrastructure and helps influence local policy.
There is a continuing need for experts to help structure and design investment products suitable for the challenges at hand, community groups to help identify opportunities for investment, government bodies to support regulatory infrastructure that encourages investment, researchers to deliver market intelligence, and more investors to provide capital. It’s going to take all types of players working together to ensure impact investing reaches its full potential.
Institutional investors such as superannuation funds and large insurers will be critical to scaling impact investing. In Australia, the pioneering activity of impact investors such as Christian Super, QBE and Hesta along with the sheer size of the superannuation market (AU$2tn in 2016 and growing) positions the country to potentially serve as a prominent example for the rest of the world’s institutional investors.
With products such as the recent AU$30m impact investment fund capitalised by Hesta and managed by Social Ventures Australia, or the “Premiums4Good” product launched by QBE, investors are both responding to client demand and innovating with financial products. This will ensure better lives that not only include healthy future retirements but also a healthy future society.
Institutional investors are also helping to develop impact investing fund managers who can direct capital to high-impact enterprises. A prominent example is LeapFrog, a fund manager with a founding office in Sydney. LeapFrog manages over US$1bn in impact capital targeted at improving financial inclusion in emerging markets. Its investors include institutional investors such as Zurich Insurance Group, TIAA, Prudential and Axa.
This is one area of impact investing where consumers could really make a difference by communicating their interest in impact investments to the managers of their retirement funds. More consumers can seek out ways to best align their assets with their values.
Australian impact investors demonstrate a clear focus on issues important to the country, such as affordable housing, conservation and supporting Indigenous community needs.
However, as in many developed countries, local investors also show a strong interest in international challenges, especially those affecting the greater Asia Pacific region.
Indeed, the Australian government’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade is playing a pioneering role in driving Australian impact capital towards addressing challenges in its geographic neighbourhood.
Many impact investors are also motivated by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and are eager to explore the role impact investing will play in achieving that global agenda. GIIN research shows impact investors see the SDGs as a valuable global framework that helps to ensure individual deals add up to something bigger – that the whole will be greater than the sum of its parts. Still, there is a clear need for more capital in order to achieve these ambitious goals. As such, the GIIN recently put out a call for all investors to make at least one SDG-focused impact investment – and to get started on this effort immediately.
The most evident trend around the world in this sector is an increased interest in unleashing the power of capital to drive social and environmental change. We live in an exciting time for social progress, though that excitement is tempered by great need.
Today there is a real opportunity to create a more integrated view of finance where people see that aligning their money with their values not only makes sense, but that it is critical to building the kind of world we want to live in.
Sir Philip Green may have to pay £1bn to resolve the problems facing the BHS pension scheme under proposals tabled by MPs.
The work and pensions committee, which is chaired by Labour MP Frank Field, has called for the government to introduce a “nuclear deterrent” to stop companies or individuals trying to avoid their responsibilities to pension schemes.
This deterrent would be a fine from The Pensions Regulator (TPR) worth three times the amount it believes a company or individual should contribute towards filling the deficit in a pension scheme. Given that the regulator is understood to be seeking £350m from Green for the BHS pensions scheme, this means it could threaten the billionaire tycoon with a charge of about £1bn.
The deterrent is part of a package of measures proposed by the parliamentary committee to avoid another BHS scandal.
BHS collapsed into administration in April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs and leaving a £571m deficit. The regulator has started legal proceedings against Green and Dominic Chappell, the former owners of BHS, in an attempt to fill the deficit. They collected millions of pounds from the retailer.
Field said: “It is difficult to imagine [TPR] would still be having to negotiate with Sir Philip Green if he had been facing a bill of £1bn, rather than £350m. He would have sorted the pension scheme long ago.”
As well as threatening punitive fines, the MPs said TPR must become a “nimbler, more proactive regulator”. They said the regulator must consider recovery plans for pension schemes in deficit that last more than 10 years as “exceptional” and that it should approve every major corporate transaction.
These powers would have allowed the regulator to block a 23-year plan drawn up by Green for the BHS pension scheme while he owned it in 2012, and stop the sale of the retailer to Chappell, a three-time bankrupt.
In addition, the committee wants pension trustees to have the power to negotiate a restructuring of struggling schemes that could result in better outcomes than entering the Pension Protection Fund, where benefits are cut by at least 10%. The PPF, a government-backed lifeboat scheme, is funded by a levy on all defined benefit pension schemes. The MPs say that good corporate behaviour could be rewarded in future by paying less into the PPF.
Field added: “The measures we set out in this report are intended to reduce the chance of another scheme going down the BHS route. We hope and expect that we will never again see a company like BHS be able to come up with a 23-year recovery plan for its pension fund, and certainly not that it would take the regulator two years to really begin to do anything about it.
“It is further inconceivable that Sir Philip Green’s deal to dispose of BHS and its giant pension deficit for £1 to a dismally unqualified man, with no plan for the pension schemes and no means of financing one, would have evaded or passed any mandatory clearance scheme.”
Aside from the BHS scandal, the pension problems facing British companies are stark. By the standard measure used by the PPF, 4,272 defined benefit schemes are in deficit and the size of the black hole is £195bn. There are 5,794 defined benefit pension schemes in the UK.
In response to the report, a spokesperson for the Department for Work and Pensions said: “The majority of employers are managing their pension schemes responsibly but a few recent examples have raised some important questions. In the coming months we’ll be publishing a green paper on pension funding and as part of this we’ll be looking at powers of [TPR].”
Lesley Titcomb, chief executive of TPR, said: “We welcome the committee’s report which recognises the importance of robust and proportionate regulation for workplace defined benefit pension schemes and of ensuring that workplace pension savers and the Pension Protection Fund are well-protected. We note its recommendations and will consider them carefully.
“We continue to discuss options with DWP for the legislative and regulatory framework for workplace pensions, and how this might be improved, ahead of the green paper, which will consider the future of pension funding, the regulatory framework and TPR’s powers.”
As UK rail passengers brace themselves for an average 2.3% rise in fares, we want to hear from our readers about their service
Major housebuilders such as Taylor Wimpey and Persimmon may be forced to spend millions compensating home buyers locked into unfair leasehold contracts, following a warning by housing minister Gavin Barwell.
Amid accusations in the House of Commons of “the PPI scandal of the property sector”, Barwell ordered developers to halt future sales of leasehold houses or face government action next year.
He also told developers to come up with solutions for householders already stuck in homes where soaring ground rents have made their property virtually unsaleable.
“There is a widespread problem here that needs addressing. These practices are not illegal but it seems to be one of those cases where there is a gulf between the letter of the law and our sense of what is right.
“The secretary of state and I are clear that it is not just a matter of stopping this practice going forward, but it is also about addressing hard working people who believe they have bought their home but actually they are in a position where they may find they are unable to sell that home down the line.”
A series of reports in Guardian Money has revealed how developers have been selling detached and semi-detached houses as leasehold, with clauses which allow the ground rent to double every 10 years. The freeholds are then sold on to private companies which extract the ground rent, charge high fees if a homeowner wishes to make alterations, and refuse to sell the freehold except for a huge premium.
Homebuyers have been left with houses they cannot sell as lenders will no longer offer mortgages against them because of the ground rent clauses. 
“My constituents have been comprehensively stitched up,” said Justin Madders MP, adding that in his Ellesmere Port constituency the practice of selling new-build houses as leasehold has become common place in recent years.
He told the Commons how the buyer of a Bellway home in his constituency was told the freehold would cost £3,750 to purchase, but when it was sold on to a third party, Adriatic Land, the price went up to £12,750 the next year.
Madders said another constituent was told by Taylor Wimpey that they would be given first refusal on the purchase of the freehold, but it was then sold on without their knowledge or approval. In one extreme case a constituent will see the ground rent on their home rise to £11,000 a year by the middle of this century, and then to £367m a year by the end of the lease period.
“It can only be described as a racket by the country’s biggest developers,” he added.
Taylor Wimpey said it has stopped selling leasehold houses with ground rents that double every decade. Recent sales have moved to a formula based on the retail prices index.
The Commons debate highlighted numerous other abuses in the leasehold sector, including excessive service charges, 40% insurance commissions, manipulation of leasehold valuation tribunals, and even the forfeiture of homes by leaseholders who battle freeholders.
Barwell admitted that while leasehold can work, in many places it is failing. He said that while more than four out of 10 new properties in England and Wales are now sold as leasehold, 57% of buyers later regret purchasing such a property. “It’s a pretty sobering figure,” Barwell said.
Jim Fitzpatrick MP, whose Poplar and Limehouse constituency has among the highest concentrations of leasehold in England, told the Commons of battles between residents of one Canary Wharf block and their freeholder, billionaire John Christodoulou.
He said residents are likely to be landed with a legal bill for around £500,000 after challenging the freeholder. “The residents will be half a million pounds poorer with nowhere else to turn. None of this impacts the value of Christodoulou’s investment. The only people damaged are the leasees.”
In disputes between freeholders and leaseholders, freeholders are often able to charge their legal fees on to the service charge of the leaseholders.
Peter Bottomley MP told the Commons how one elderly couple challenged their £9,000 a year service charge and obtained a tribunal ruling striking out £7,000 of the costs. Yet they ended up with a legal bill from the other side for £70,000 and faced the forfeiture of their home.
From the start of January, UK train fares will be rising again - this year by an average of 2.3%. 
The Guardian would like to hear from regular travellers who can describe how 2016 was for them on the trains - and how they feel about being asked to pay yet more.
Outside the well-documented problems on Southern, has your service declined, improved or remained the same? Do you get a seat? Do you get value for money?
You can share your experiences by filling out the form below. We’ll be featuring a selection of your stories in our coverage.
BT, Plusnet and EE were the most complained about broadband providers in the third quarter of 2016, figures from Ofcom show.
BT, which owns the Plusnet and EE brands, came top of the list with 36 complaints per 100,000 subscribers, followed by Plusnet with 30 and EE at 26, the media regulator said. Sky was the least complained about broadband provider.
Plusnet and EE also topped the landline complaints table, with 24 and 20 complaints per 100,000 customers respectively, followed by the Post Office (20) and BT (19). 
The total volume of landline and broadband complaints made to Ofcom increased between the second and third quarter of 2016, while the number of pay-monthly mobile complaints decreased and pay TV complaints remained stable.
The data showed that TalkTalk reduced the number of complaints it got, while all three BT brands worsened their broadband performance in the third quarter of the year.
Vodafone remained well ahead of its competitors for mobile complaints, receiving 18 per 100,000 customers between July and September – three times the industry average of six. Tesco Mobile was the least complained about mobile provider.
Complaints about BT’s TV service were almost four times the industry average. Ofcom received 19 complaints per 100,000 subscribers from BT TV customers, while Sky received the fewest, with just one complaint for every 100,000 customers.
Lindsey Fussell, director of Ofcom’s consumer group, said: “We won’t stand for complacency when it comes to customer service. We expect providers to make it a top priority and work hard to better serve their customers.
“If companies let their customers down, we will step in and investigate, which can lead to significant fines.”
A BT spokesman said: “We apologise to customers we’ve let down. BT cares about the service it gives to customers and we know we need to do better. There were a couple of exceptional broadband outages during the period in question which undoubtedly influenced the broadband figures.”
• Ofcom has identified a number of areas where it considers new or strengthened regulation is needed to better protect consumers from the telecoms companies. It wants to see improvements in the areas of complaints handling, nuisance calls, billing and debt collection. Other important changes seek to address the particular needs of vulnerable and disabled customers. It has invited responses to the consultation by 14 March 2017, and will publish a revised set of rules later in the year.
Lloyds Banking Group is to spend £1.9bn on MBNA, a credit card business owned by Bank of America, as the bailed-out lender continues its recovery from the financial crisis.
The UK bank’s first major acquisition since its £20bn rescue by the taxpayer during the 2008 crisis will give it a 26% share of the credit card market and allow it to produce £100m annual savings within two years.
Lloyds, 7% owned by the taxpayer, would not comment on the implications for the workforces of the two operations, which employ a combined 2,700 in Chester.
MBNA – one of the UK’s largest credit card issuers, with 7 million customers including its own brands and the official cards of several major football clubs – has been on the market for some time. Lloyds had been battling against US private equity group Cerberus, HSBC and Santander UK for the operation.
A firewall against claims for payment protection insurance (PPI) was thought to be crucial in securing the deal. The misselling scandal has already cost Lloyds £17bn – more than any other bank – and Lloyds said its exposure to MBNA’s bill was capped at £240m, indicating Bank of America will pick up the tab for anything above that threshold.
The deal is expected to complete in the first six months of 2017, during which time the government is expected to sell the last of its shares in Lloyds.
Lloyds was the biggest riser on the FTSE 100 by mid-afternoon, up about 2.5% to 64p. The government is selling off its remaining stake at prices below the 76.3p average price at which taxpayers paid to take a 43% stake during the crisis.
António Horta-Osório, the Lloyds chief executive, said the MBNA name would be retained as part of the bank’s multi-brand strategy. Among its brands are Halifax, Bank of Scotland and car finance lender Black Horse. It also, he said, “advances our strategic aim to deliver sustainable growth as a UK-focused retail and commercial bank”.
Lloyds paid for the business out of its reserves, which sparked some concerns that it might not be able to pay a special dividend to shareholders. The bank insisted its payout policy was not altered. “Nothing has changed,” said George Culmer, Lloyds’ finance director.
The transaction further focuses Lloyds on the domestic market at time when the UK is preparing to exit the EU. Joseph Dickerson, a banking analyst at Jefferies, said the deal was “a very good use” of Lloyds’ excess capital and that the terms looked attractive.
Dickerson said that a special dividend “is now unlikely but the MBNA acquisition looks a better use of excess to us”.
The deal will increase Lloyds’ market share of credit cards from 15% to 26%, making it second only to Barclaycard in terms of size.
Culmer acknowledged the deal was subject to competition approval but he said a recent study had found the credit card market was “healthy and competitive”.
The bank has a 25% share of current accounts, 22% of retail deposits and 21% of mortgages.
The total value of Britain’s 28.9m homes has risen by more than 7% in 2016 to reach a total of £8.17tn, according to new research.
This means the average property has gone up in value by £56.57 a day, according to property website Zoopla, which named the Norfolk market town of Diss as “the year’s biggest winner” when it came to price growth.
The site analysed its price data between 1 January and 7 December 2016, and said Britain’s total housing stock was now worth £8,165,502,086,907. This was an increase of £559bn – or 7.35% – since January.
Regionally, property values in the east of England were said to have grown the most since the start of the year – by 11.56% on average, to reach a typical £358,401. The West Midlands was in second place with an increase of 8.74%.
London, which has previously been the region leading the charge, was third from bottom in the table with an increase of 5.12%.
At a local level, Diss was named the “best-performing” town, experiencing a growth rate of 16.2% and taking the average home’s value to £305,896.
It was one of a number of locations that have become increasingly popular with people who are looking for somewhere that enables them to buy a bigger property than they could obtain in London and at the same time continue to work in the capital. The fastest trains offer a commuting time between Diss and London Liverpool Street of less than 90 minutes.
Leatherhead in Surrey came second, with properties typically rising 14.7% to reach £833,631.
Aberdeen was named the “poorest performing” town in terms of property values over the past year, with average prices falling by an average of 2.83% to £217,234.
The collapse in global oil prices has sent house prices tumbling in Aberdeen and other areas reliant on the North Sea oil industry.
The data also showed Brits spent 2016 looking for outside space. 
According to Zoopla keyword search figures for the year, “garden” remained the most popular term. However, “garage” rose from third to second place. The biggest mover was “parking,” which soared from the eighth to the fourth most popular search term when compared with this time last year.
Lawrence Hall, a spokesperson for the site, said: “2016 has certainly been a historic year, with the events of the past six months giving rise to potential political uncertainty. However, the property market – it seems – remains resilient, and property values across Britain have continued to grow.”
Back in June I rented a car for a week from Fleet Rent a Car at Dubrovnik airport via the Holiday Autos website. The plane was slightly late and Fleet charged me an extra £32 for late pick-up. It also took my card details for pre-authorisation of £1,250, which was refunded at the end of the rental when the car was returned on time, full of petrol and with no damage.
I assumed that was the end of it but then, in September, two payments were taken from my credit card, amounting to £325. I immediately contacted Holiday Autos with the reference number of the booking, and was eventually told it was a late pick-up charge. I pointed out that this was already paid and sent it my credit card statement, but this has been ignored.
How can a car hire company just take money without any authority and the agent not do anything about it? MW, Cambridge
Receiving unexpected charges on your credit card months after the event is just one the pleasures of hiring a car in Europe these days. This one was at least relatively easy to sort out. Holiday Autos claimed the additional charges came as a result of a “clerical error on the supplier’s part”. The “supplier” has now agreed to refund you in full for the £325. Additionally, Holiday Autos is sending you a token of goodwill for the inconvenience caused by the issue.
European consumer bodies really need to tackle the car hire industry and put in place ways to stop these spurious charges appearing on renters’ bills.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
The Australian government has announced a taskforce to “crack down on the black economy”, with a panel reportedly to consider measures such as removing the $100 note from circulation and limiting cash transactions above a certain limit.
So what is the “black economy”, and what is it composed of?
In her press release, the minister for revenue and financial services, Kelly O’Dwyer, defined it in the following way:
The black economy is also variously known as the underground economy, the non-observed economy or the shadow economy, and definitions can vary to include different activities. It can include things such as undeclared cash-in-hand employment, cash payments for goods and services, and payment for illegal activities.
One estimate of the underground economy from 1999, which only considered cash transactions and excluded illegal activities, put the size of the underground economy at around 15% of gross domestic product.
However, a more recent estimate by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) in 2013, which encompassed proceeds from illegal activities as well as other areas, estimated the size to be far smaller, at only 2.1% of GDP.
Here you can see the components of what the ABS called the “non-observed economy” (use the button to compare with GDP):
The largest component is “underground production”, which had an estimated value of 1.5% of GDP at the time, or $22.7bn. Underground production is defined as “activities which may be legal but are deliberately concealed from public authorities”, such as undeclared cash-in-hand jobs, and the ABS report says it is typically concentrated in industries such as “construction, accommodation, cafes and restaurants, personal and other services, and retail trade”.
Indeed, construction topped the list of industry groups in the anlysis of underground production, where the estimate of the understatement of income and overstatement of expenses was considered relative to the industry’s contribution towards GDP.
The next-largest overall component is the illegal drug trade, with an estimated value of $5.6bn.
The last category is “household production for own use”. This may be a less-familiar category than the other two, and it’s defined as “own–account production of all goods retained by their producers for their own final consumption or gross capital formation; and own–account production of housing services by owner–occupied dwellings”.
This means things such as backyard production of vegetables or livestock, solar power, and the “imputation of rent to owner-occupied dwellings”. This is a bit tricky to explain but you can read more about the category here.
One of the measures to be examined will be the potential phasing out of the $100 bill, O’Dwyer said in an interview on 3AW.
A recent Reserve Bank of Australia bulletin showed that the two banknotes in highest demand were the $50 and $100 dollar bills, with these two making up the majority of notes in circulation:
The same report showed that while the use of cash for payments is declining, it’s still the most popular option. It also noted that removing $100 notes would have little impact on illegal activities, as criminal elements reportedly prefer the $50 note as it’s more common in legitimate transactions.
There is little to be said for the strike stopping some customers getting their Christmas presents in the post, nor the ones threatened by British Airways cabin staff and baggage handlers at many of the UK’s airports that threaten long-planned festive breaks, nor for the long-running dispute that is making the lives of commuters in parts of south-east England so miserable. But they are not the start of a wild-eyed workers’ insurgency, as some overexcited reports have suggested in the past few days. Nor, whether or not they achieve their legitimate aim of protecting their members’ interests, are they helping the wider trade union movement to find a new relevance and authority as membership declines in a rapidly changing economy.
There will possibly be a third more days lost to strikes in 2016 than in 2015. But last year was exceptionally peaceful on the industrial front, the most peaceful since 2005. The total of lost days for 2016 is still historically low. The point of this unnecessary row is that in some quarters, although it would seem not in Downing Street, there is still an appetite for more union-bashing laws. Some backbenchers hanker after the ultimate objective of the anti-union right since the Trade Disputes Act of 1906 reversed the Taff Vale judgment, removing trade union immunity from damages – thus effectively making industrial action impossible. This is daft on every front, not least because there would be no majority for it in parliament; the government was forced to make serial concessions on the trade union act, which is due to come into force next March. It already significantly narrows the possibilities of a strike by requiring not only a majority in favour of strike action, but a turnout of at least 50% of those entitled to vote. If parliament approves more regulations next month, it will also ban strike action in “important public services”, including the railways, unless it is backed by more than 40% of those entitled to vote.
What workers need is not more legislation to curb trade unions, but a trade union movement that is modern and responsive to the needs of the world where most people work. Trade union members tend to be older, better off and work in the old public sector. In the private sector, union membership is below 15%. If unions can’t find a way to reach younger workers to whom the tradition of collective action is unfamiliar, they are doomed to a slow death. Half of all jobs growth is among the self-employed. This is an audience that is deterred rather than attracted by old white men sounding antagonistic towards their employers.
Last year the union Community, which has set out to recruit self-employed people as well as a wide range of other workers, conducted research that found, if offered help by a trade union, a mere 19% would sign up. Offered similar help from an independent source, 75% would take up the offer. The union’s latest project is with Indycube, an organisation that sets up co-work spaces in redundant offices. Community wants to offer the self-employed not traditional union services but advice on contracts or slow payers. Others look across the Atlantic to movements like the minimum wage campaign Fight for $15, which began with a trade unionist, David Rolf, and has become a nationwide social movement organising for decent pay in sectors like fast food and social care. Workers need a strong, clear voice as much now as they ever had.
Ticket resale websites and the touts who use them could be fined after the competition watchdog launched an investigation into how the best seats are harvested and then sold on at huge mark-ups before fans can buy them at face value.
The Competition and Market Authority said it was examining suspected breaches of consumer law after reviewing the four secondary ticket companies – Viagogo, StubHub, GetMeIn and Seatwave – that sell on previously purchased tickets.
It will examine several areas of concern in the secondary ticketing market, including whether touts use “connections” at resale websites to gain an advantage over fans, such as information that helps them decide which tickets to market aggressively.
The probe follows increasing scrutiny of the sector by MPs concerned about the inflated prices at which tickets are being sold. Earlier this month hundreds of tickets to see Adele next summer appeared on resale websites for up to £9,000, the latest in a string of in-demand events seized on by the UK’s most successful touts.
Andrea Coscelli, acting chief executive of the CMA, said: “A night out at a concert or a trip to a big match is something that millions of people look forward to. So it’s important they know who they are buying from and whether there are any restrictions that could stop them using the ticket.”
“If we find breaches of consumer law, we will take enforcement action,” he added.
Rules introduced in 2015 require ticket resellers to provide details of the block, row and seat number, as well as the face value and information about any restrictions. Last year, the CMA secured pledges from the main websites that they would improve the information provided to buyers.
The CMA said one site failed to comply with the demand to provide such information. GetMeIn, Seatwave and StubHub said they were not the site in question. Switzerland-based Viagogo did not return a request for comment.
The watchdog has powers to force firms which breach the law to provide undertakings to improve their behaviour, while the courts can impose fines on those who do not.
The CMA’s investigation will also turn the spotlight on the touts, who are already facing the prospect of a tax investigation by HMRC. Those found to be concealing their identities or ticket details could face court-imposed fines.
A CMA presentation given recently to the Society of Ticket Agents and Retailers, seen by the Guardian, states that even the very act of bulk-buying tickets for resale is illegal. This is because anyone masquerading as a consumer for the purpose of business is in breach of the Consumer Protection from Unfair Trading Regulations 2008.
The CMA’s probe will also examine whether major touts, some of whom were named in an investigation by the Observer, are exploiting “connections” at ticket websites. A whistleblower from one resale site said touts are sometimes handed inside information to help them grab the best seats at must-have concerts.
Consumer body Which? urged the CMA to stake strong action. Vickie Sheriff, director of campaigns and communications at the consumer body, said: “On numerous occasions we have found tickets being sold unlawfully, so we welcome the competition authorities taking action to tackle this.”
Labour MP Sharon Hodgson, who chairs the All Party Parliamentary Group on Ticket Abuse, said it was “paramount that enforcement action is taken seriously and swiftly”. She also called on the government to tackle “bulk purchasing” by touts, amid calls to criminalise the use of ‘bots’, automated software sometimes used to buy large numbers of tickets.
Despite the CMA’s probe, some ticketing experts expressed disappointment. Music industry group FanFairAlliance said: “UK audiences will continue to be frustrated that measures to genuinely fix ticket resale are not being taken sooner – and while other countries take swift and decisive actions, British fans continue to be ripped off by touts operating under cover on the Big Four resale sites.
“We call on the government to respond to recommendations made in the Waterson review on secondary ticketing, and welcome the potential of a full inquiry by the select committee in the new year.”
A government-commissioned review by Prof Michael Waterson concluded this year that ticket resellers that do not comply with last year’s rule changes should be taken to court. The government has yet to respond to the review.
Security consultant Reg Walker, who recently testified to MPs about “ticket abuse”, cast doubt on the CMA’s assertion that most ticket sites are now complying with consumer protection laws.
“Given the information in the public domain about all four websites, I fail to see how any are fully complying with the Consumer Rights Act, let alone just one.”
Walker called on the CMA to demand firms hand over records of the touts who use them, to establish whether they are breaking the law.
The current “inefficient and confusing” system of government-backed financial help for consumers is to be replaced with a new one-stop-shop organisation that will advise consumers about debt, pensions and scams.
This new body will replace three existing publicly-funded organisations, one of which came under fire for spending more than £100m on marketing and advertising in an attempt to increase brand awareness.
The Treasury said the new system would make it easier for consumers to get the financial help they needed at a time when demand for debt advice was increasing and millions of people had more choices about what to do with their retirement cash.
This new body, which is yet to be named, will replace the Money Advice Service (MAS), the Pensions Advisory Service (TPAS) and the government’s Pension Wise service, which all provide free and impartial financial guidance.
In his March 2016 budget, the then chancellor George Osborne said the plan was to create two new organisations, one of which would focus purely on pensions. However, the government said that, following a consultation, it now intended to set up a single body. It will provide debt advice and help with pensions, advise people on how to avoid falling victim to scams and coordinate financial education programmes for children and young people.
However, this new organisation will not come into being until autumn 2018 at the earliest and the three bodies will continue to operate until then.
In a consultation document, the Treasury and the Department for Work and Pensions were critical of the existing arrangements, saying: “There are gaps in the guidance available to consumers and duplication of content between MAS, TPAS and Pension Wise. The government believes this arrangement is inefficient and confusing for consumers, with a lack of coherence between the strategies and business plans of the three services.”
MAS was set up in 2010 to improve people’s money management skills and spent more than £100m on marketing and advertising, but “achieved only a 5% to 10% brand recognition,” stated the document. This demonstrated that untargeted advertising was ineffective in raising brand awareness and helping people access services, so it was vital that the new organisation had a website that was well optimised for search engines. There will also be a phone-based service, plus face-to-face debt advice and pension guidance.
The three existing services are funded by levies on the financial services and pensions industries and it is planned that this will continue. The government believes it may be possible to reduce the overall costs as efficiencies generated from merging the three services begin to materialise.
Simon Kirby, the economic secretary to the Treasury, said: “We want to help people take charge of their finances and make the financial decisions that are right for them. This new body will ensure that help is readily available for people who need to access debt advice, information on their pensions or guidance on other money matters.”
Tom Selby, a senior analyst at investment company AJ Bell, said that moving to a single body should reduce the costs paid by the industry and, ultimately, by the consumers who buy products and services. ”It’s absolutely critical that savers are warned of the dangers posed by scammers intent on stealing their savings,” he said.
We seem to love the working class as long as it is a) white and b) passive. The real working class is neither. It is multi-ethnic and, from Southern Rail to British Airways, it is set to strike.
Predictably, the Conservatives are calling for more legal restrictions on strike action. Theresa May accused strikers of “contempt for ordinary people”. And – as always – the neck veins of TV reporters are bulging as they express outrage on behalf of those affected.
Yet, try as they might, the politicians and journalists have failed to stir up mob hatred against the strikers, some of whom – such as the Southern Rail drivers and guards – have been taking industrial action for weeks. And the reasons for this are obvious: they are ordinary people.
While the miners and steelworkers of the 1980s worked in relatively insular steel and mining towns, everybody knows a BA cabin steward, a train guard, a baggage handler or a Post Office counter worker. What’s more, because so much of our work has become modular, low-paid and deskilled, many people know, or can guess, exactly what they are going through.
We have near full employment yet near wage stagnation. The strikes taking place over Christmas are happening among workers who have not seen a pay rise for years. BA’s onboard customer service managers, for example, have been stripped of their union negotiation rights and had their pay frozen for six years.
One of the most pitiful things about the political class, and the economists who whisper certainties in their ear, is their distance from the actual experience of work. As trade union rights have become eroded throughout the private sector, and large chunks of the public sector become privatised, a culture of coercion has taken root at work.
It does not have to be as bad as the leading fast-food cafe chain where a secret shopper deducts the bonus of an entire shift if one person does not smile. But it is pervasive.
Generally, you are supposed to smile, supposed to exhibit happiness for your seven quid an hour, obey orders without question, to hit meaningless targets or scam them on the instruction of your line manager – and, increasingly, you’re supposed to pretend you are self-employed.
You can spend entire days, if you think about it, being served only by people with no actual employment status: the Uber driver, the hairdresser, the physiotherapist. Even businesses where you’re paying a limited company through your credit card now routinely require their “associates” to be self-empolyed.
The result looks like a fake-tan version of Downtown Abbey with all the same levels of deference but zero paternal responsibility. And deep down, people who work for a living understand the modern “contract” between worker and employer is barely worth the paper it is written on.
That’s why workers with union rights and relative job security use the strike weapon. It’s never pleasant. But every cabin worker at BA and Virgin knows that, without the unions, they would see their pension rights stolen and their conditions eroded to the same levels enjoyed by their counterparts at the budget airlines.
And what’s driving the attacks is always the same familiar, financial pressure. Public services, once privatised, are forced to enter a race to the bottom in terms of pay, conditions and pensions for their workers. Once financial logic overtakes the logic of providing a service as efficiently as possible, you get the stupidities of Southern Rail, which cut its services to passengers in order to provide itself with an achievable target.
Jeremy Corbyn has been condemned for failing to condemn the strikes – and for attending a Christmas party with the Aslef union. If it were up to me, Corbyn would actually throw a Christmas party, not just for the Aslef strikers but for all the workers toiling on basic pay, fictitious contracts and unachievable targets over the festive period.
Those of us in unions – and there are still millions of us – know they make a massive and positive difference. Because workers on London Underground are unionised, there is a guard at my local tube station who refuses to wear any other name badge than one with “Lenin” on it.
Although I do not recommend this level of resistance for everybody, it is a physical symbol of the fact that unionised workers are people you do not mess around with.
The Southern strikers, the BA crews and the Post Office workers are showing a different side of what it means to express your collective identity at work. So did the junior doctors, whose determined action got them a better deal than their leaders originally thought they could achieve.
Coming on top of the strikes by Deliveroo riders and a union-led court victory for Uber drivers, these are signs that even the heavily casualised workforce of the 21st century will not suffer indignity for ever.
In economics, it has become common to hear that one of the main failings of the current system is wage stagnation; even the Bank of England would like to see more inflation. So don’t complain about the posties, train drivers, cabin crews and baggage handlers – they’re only doing what we all should in 2017.
Ask for a pay rise, defend your pension rights, insist that work conditions are respectful and safe – and demand your employer negotiates with a real trade union and pays the rate for the job.
I was recently paying my bill at a restaurant and doing the awkward “was-there-service-included?” routine when the waiter interjected: “We don’t get any of that. In fact, that service charge makes it worse because it means people don’t ever tip us.” I gave the waiter the £10 I had in my pocket and vowed never to go back.
That day I was a customer, but on other days I am a waitress. The £10 tip I gave was more than a third of what I get paid for a standard four-hour shift. It is about 5% of the £212 set menu at Le Gavroche, Michel Roux Jr’s Michelin-starred restaurant that last week admitted to pocketing 100% of service charge as revenue.
As a customer that makes me angry because, like the HMRC and 61% of the public, I assume that service charge goes straight to staff. Why shouldn’t I? Service charge is added onto my bill separately, is optional, and is not taxable. Pocketing that charge, no matter how legal or “transparent”, feels like false advertising at best, and daylight robbery at worst.
But as somebody who is also a waitress, the idea of a customer thinking they are giving me a top-up because my salary isn’t already enough to live on, but that money instead going to the people who aren’t willing to pay me a decent wage, is painful.
As a waitress, I get paid £7.25 an hour, 5p more than the minimum wage. I get paid less than the minimum income standard, which is what the Joseph Rowntree Foundation suggests is required to “live to an adequate level”. It is £2.50 an hour less than the London living wage, the amount that I would need to earn to not be in-work poverty. In short, my wage as a waitress is not enough to provide me with a basic standard of living.
And my job is hard. On a busy day, I am juggling anywhere up to 30 orders in my head at a time. Alongside the manual effort of being on my feet for 12 hours, carrying crates and stacking plates, I am constantly having to make calculations. I have to know when each order will be in the kitchen, and how long that leaves me to clean up after the table of eight in the corner, all while understanding that table 44 wants to pay now, and if they do a runner it’ll be my wages it comes out of.
I’ll be watching the clock in case a customer comes in, a minute before closing, demanding to be seated – their reason being that they’ve only just finished work. They won’t realise that what I am doing is work too.
Of course, it’s all part of my job, and there are elements of my job that I love. I get to change my hours, which gives me the flexibility to do other stuff. Sometimes I don’t work Mondays. And when I work a double shift, I do it in the knowledge that I will be surrounded by people, which is sort of like seeing people in the evening anyway.
But while some romanticise the aspects of my work that they feel make it different to a “real” job with “real” concerns, I am in fact a real person. I need to make ends meet and, while my three-hour lunch break in the middle of a double shift might look like a luxury, in reality it is spent trying to avoid spending money because, as was once pointed out to me, a coffee is a third of my hourly wage.
That’s where tips come in. I wish we didn’t have to rely on them: they make our lives unstable and they turn a lot of what makes my job enjoyable into a crude, transactional performance. But the reality is that our employers don’t pay us enough, and customers are the people that make this career financially viable.
The worst thing about Roux’s decision last week, is by now promising to mark on bills and menus that no further payment was needed, while leaving it open, in theory, for customers to leave a tip, the move is likely to deter that option for many. In a world where our employers don’t pay us enough to live on, the least resturants can do is to allow waiting staff to benefit from the good grace of other humans.
Harry Potter fans turned a mundane £450,000 three-bed home in Bracknell, Berkshire, into one of the most sought-after properties in the country in 2016 - although it was edged out of the top spot by a £55m luxury townhouse in Belgravia, London. 
Rightmove, Britain’s biggest property website with around 127m visits a month, has compiled a list of the top 10 most-viewed homes across its site in 2016.
Behind the Victorian facade lies 9,000 sq ft of contemporary home, including the obligatory basement pool, gym and indoor cinema. Its gardens and terraces have been designed by a Chelsea Flower Show gold medallist, and its Addison Road address is one of the most prestigious in west London. It was first listed, according to Rightmove, in January 2016, and but is now understood to have been sold for an undisclosed price.
This fixer-upper dates back to at least 1613 and has links to Victorian adventure novelist Rider Haggard. The Grade II-listed gatehouse comes with 1.66 acres and is in need of complete renovation. But before you sell that one-bed flat in south London to live like a lord in Suffolk, the bad news is that it has gone under offer. The agents say: “Fixer-uppers are generally extremely popular, so will often sell well in any case. Its size and potential charmed a huge amount of people who came to view the property, despite its listed status and need for major renovation from top to bottom. Safe to say, after over 150 viewings and multiple open days, we have achieved a lot more than the guide price with an offer now locked in (subject to contract).”
The ultimate Notting Hill dream home, so say the agents, but the current owners of this mansion in Pembridge Square are “cagey” about being named or disclosing the sale price. Apart from the eight bedrooms, nine bathrooms and four reception rooms, the agent says the “centre piece of the lower ground area is a lavish spa with an oval-shaped massage area and a large gym”. An architectural historian writes on the Pembridge Association newsletter that “the houses represent the style of a country which exercised a dominating influence throughout the world. That style was determined by the attempt to combine grandeur with economy of means”.
This three-bed terrace house over three floors is in one of Bedford’s most desirable locations, just a 45-minute hop into central London from the local train station. The price tag, character features and a decent-sized garden made it hugely popular on Rightmove. “Among the really expensive and unusual ones each year we often see a few that just have really nice features, like this cottage,” a spokeswoman said.
Why would a humble two-bed cottage in Shropshire, extending to just over 1,000 feet, generate such huge interest? Because it is one of the few remaining cave houses in Britain. Once the home of local artist Anthony Dracup, the key feature of the property is the 650 sq ft cave to the rear, with gothic archways and vaulted pillars. It is, according to the agents, “unlike anything else you are likely to see”.
The agents call it “one of the finest new mansions in the Ascot area”, but this new-build eight-bed, ninth-bath home has failed to find a buyer since first listing in October 2014. It includes a 14-seat cinema, three powder rooms and its own spa with a sauna, gym and 13m indoor pool, so it’s handy that the property also comes with its own staff quarters. The agents say it has “many high-impact rooms”, adding that “it’s no surprise that it has attracted a great deal of attention”. But not, it would seem buyers: it first listed at £24m before dropping to £19.75m earlier this year. Now with a £17.95m guide price it’s almost a bargain.
Rather better known as 4 Privet Drive, the Dursleys home in the Harry Potter films, this three-bed home went on the market in September, but has since been removed from sale. Any buyers will be able to make their own use of the cupboard under the stairs, which in the film was Harry’s place to sleep. The agents say the home is “in a quiet cul-de-sac location” and “has recently undergone complete renovation to an extremely high standard”. 
Despite listing on Rightmove only a month ago, this island fortress off the Pembrokeshire coast has ignited huge interest. The Napoleonic-era fort, built to defend Milford Haven harbour and garrison 100 men, has 10 bedrooms and three bathrooms, but would need serious amounts of money spent to bring it up to habitable condition. Or in perfect estate agency-ese, the new owner “will wish to reconfigure the accommodation”.
Ex-footballer Ashley Ward and wife Dawn, star of the reality TV show Real Housewives of Cheshire, have reportedly had their ­11-bed mansion on the market since October 2013, but three years later it’s still on sale, despite having £1.5m knocked off the price. Set in 12 acres, it boasts a princess-themed bedroom, hair and nail salon, games room and cinema, with interiors designed by Dawn (who has also worked for Wayne Rooney and Steven Gerrard). But plans to build conference and banquet facilities on the site raised objections from around 150 neighbours in this upmarket Cheshire village.
The 10,500 sq ft former Belgian embassy in Eaton Square, and headquarters to the Belgian government-in-exile during the second world war, was sumptuously renovated and put on the market for £55m in November 2015. It boasts gold chandeliers, retractable glass ceilings, a basement swimming pool and a passenger elevator should the stairs across its six floors become too much. But its failure to find a buyer willing to pay not just the £55m asking price, but also the £6.5m stamp duy, is indicative of the slump in the top end of the London market.
Mobile phone manufacturers and providers are facing demands from ministers to introduce software that will prevent drivers from being distracted by calls and texts.
An informal meeting in Whitehall is due to take place early in the new year, the Guardian can reveal, in which ministers and officials will tell mobile companies that “drive safe” modes, similar to the airplane mode that has become standard, must be included in basic software ahead of a broader crackdown on illegal mobile phone use on the roads.
Drive safe mode differs from a flight safe mode because it can potentially let the driver make emergency calls or accept calls from certain designated persons. There is also the possibility of automatically blocking the phone using GPS technology if certain speeds are reached.
In spring 2017, the fixed penalty for using a mobile phone while driving without a hands-free device will double to £200. The fixed penalty notice will increase from three to six points.
Ministers are concerned by the number of deaths that are at least partly attributed to being distracted by mobile phones – about 20 a year – with “distraction in vehicle” a factor in 70 deaths annually.
Holding a mobile phone while driving has been illegal since December 2003, but there has been an alarming change in motorists’ attitudes to talking to friends or colleagues without using hands-free devices.
Two-thirds of the population own smartphones and the vast array of apps and functions means there are increasing distractions for drivers.
The RAC’s annual report on motoring, published in September, found the number of drivers who admitted to using a handheld mobile phone on the road had increased from 8% in 2014 to 31%.
Nearly one-fifth admitted to sending a text or email, or posting on social media, while 14% filmed a video or took a photo while driving. The number of drivers who thought it was acceptable to take a quick call on a handheld phone doubled to 14%.
The transport minister Lord Ahmad said the meeting would “consider safe drive modes, or other practical applications, when a person is driving”.
But road safety campaigners said the government should compel manufacturers to include a drive safe button, if they resisted ministerial pressure.
A separate RAC Foundation-commissioned report published this summer found that without a legal obligation, few companies would include software that limited the use of their equipment, because it would put them at a commercial disadvantage and they felt the onus was on the driver to make sure their use of technology complied with the law.
Steve Gooding, the director of the RAC Foundation, said: “New smartphones and tablets come fresh out of the box loaded with apps and other functions, easily activated through on-screen icons. While flight safe mode comes as standard issue, where is the drive safe equivalent?
“Drivers must carry the personal responsibility for avoiding distraction when they are at the wheel, but telecoms companies surely have an obligation to help them do the right thing, something we’re discussing with the Department for Transport (DfT).
“If industry doesn’t help voluntarily, then maybe we need to consider legislative options.”
Gary Rae, the campaigns director for road safety charity Brake, said: “We’re pleased that Lord Ahmad is looking into this. The use of mobiles behind the wheel is a growing menace.
“Drivers who use phones, either hands-free or handheld, have been found by researchers to be four times more likely to be in a crash resulting in injuries than drivers who were not distracted.
“The technology exists now to shut off mobiles when they’re in a vehicle. It just needs the political will to make this happen. We’re ready to take part in any talks between government, vehicle manufacturers and mobile operators.”
A DfT spokesman said: “We are determined to crack down on mobile phone use at the wheel. Our plans to double penalties for this serious crime should act as an incredibly strong deterrent. We will continue to explore what more can be done to tackle this crime.”
For Stephen Waters, the festive season is a time of transformation – when he leaves behind his normal line of work, dons a red suit and becomes Santa Claus. 
The beard, made of realistic crepe wool, has to be prepared the night before he’s due to wear it, and takes about two hours to attach. The outfit includes a jacket lined with satin and £40-a-metre fur, spectacles, leather boots and white gloves. In his hand, he carries a candy cane walking stick and an enormous pocket watch that opens to reveal moving reindeer. A musical tricycle, lit by 300 lights as he rides into town, completes the look. “From the moment I step out the door, I’m in character,” he says. “And I don’t break character until the end of the day.”
Waters – who goes by the name of Magical Santa – is one of many self-employed Santas appearing at parties, corporate events and grottos around the UK in the run-up to Christmas. Such is the demand for this iconic character that individual Santa services are competing with Santa-for-hire agencies, while Santa schools are offering training in the ways of the great man.
One of these schools is the Ministry of Fun, set up 20 years ago by James Lovell, a year after he first became Santa himself. He came to the role almost by accident, after being asked to step in at the last minute for someone who had fallen ill. He quickly realised that the job wasn’t quite as simple as it looked. Encountering a shy child who needed to be put at ease, he was able to improvise (thanks to a background as a street performer and clown), but spent a lot of time afterwards researching Santa to make sure he had things to talk about.
“I’m always ready to talk about the reindeers,” he says. “And you need to be able to discuss the very important issue of a child who doesn’t have a chimney. When you’re Santa you’ve got to be ready for anything. You’ve got to be supremely comfortable in the role.” His company, which trained 38 people this year, is now the UK’s number one provider of Santas.
It is, arguably, the most seasonal job in the world, and every Santa will have skills elsewhere that keep the money coming in for the rest of the year. Those on the books at the Ministry of Fun have a wide variety of professions including teacher, football coach, tour guide, flood damage restorer and cold-call salesman. Out of season, Waters is an sculptor, artist, busker and handyman. But there is “good money” to be made in Santa, says Lovell, with bookings for appearances typically starting to come in as early as August.
Waters makes enough money during the festive season to keep him going for about six months, and has this year turned down about £6,000 for December because he doesn’t have enough time to take on more work. He notes that a standard rate is usually about £100 an hour, although the exact amount will depend on the client and nature of the booking.
Most of his Magical Santa business has come through word of mouth, much of which Waters attributes to his work as a “Street Santa”. This involves him setting himself up on Southend high street, with a sign saying ‘Donations Welcome’, and inviting families to come over. It’s a decent source of income – takings range between £80 to £160 for a few hours – and doubles up as an opportunity to hand out business cards.
Steven Wickham, also known as The Real Santa, takes a different approach. Work usually comes via his website, although he has also dabbled with other types of marketing: paying for a promotion on Facebook and contacting his local newspapers in Buckinghamshire for publicity. This is his second Christmas as a Santa-for-hire and, while business seems to be growing steadily, he notes that it’s a competitive area.
But Wickham also has a couple of advantages when it comes to being Santa – he’s got what he calls “the real stuff” in terms of appearance, and has played Santa on several occasions in his job as a professional actor. His credits include Father Christmas in TV’s Mrs Brown’s Boys, the 2013 Littlewood’s Christmas advert, and he is currently appearing on Italian TV for mobile network TIM’s festive campaign. Wickham has already found that having an authentic beard counts for something among some customers, with a recent booking coming through for that very reason. 
There are, however, challenges other than physical appearance. One of these is a tendency by children to ask difficult questions. “The trickiest questions are the saddest ones,” says Lovell. “I was once asked if daddy could come home for Christmas – that was pretty tough. Even worse was when a child asked if I could make their little brother better. Santa doesn’t need to get involved in any of that – it’s not Santa’s job to be a counsellor, so to speak – so you’d quickly say something like: ‘I’m sorry you have troubles, but I’m Father Christmas and I’m going to make sure you have a great time this Christmas.’ Always go positive.”
Practical safeguarding issues are also a consideration. Many Santas now come with a DBS check, although this is not a legal requirement for the job, as well as public liability insurance. More generally, there are some good practice rules to be followed. In his conditions of booking, Waters stipulates that there must be two adults in the room with him at any one time, that he’s there to entertain rather than babysit, and that he isn’t left alone with children at any point.
And then, of course, the role of Santa comes with another significant responsibility: to keep the magic alive. “You hear tales of grumpy old chaps in the department store and of people who were scared of Santa for years,” says Wickham. “So I do strongly feel that you need to have the right kind of twinkly character. Because you’re messing with children’s minds. They still believe it’s real, and it should be. There are very few characters out there who can actually make people happy like Santa does.”
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
Airbnb paid UK tax of £317,000 last year after its London company handled hundreds of millions of pounds in global rent payments which generated commissions for its Irish HQ.
The UK arms of the booming home sharing website paid tax on a £1.4m profit for the 11 months ending in December 2015, their first full UK accounts reveal. One of the companies handled such a large amount of rental cash that at one point it held £430m on account.
Airbnb Payments UK Ltd handles the full rental payments between guests staying everywhere in the world except the USA, China and India and their hosts. London is Airbnb’s third biggest city worldwide behind Paris and New York, with approximately 40,000 properties to rent.
Airbnb generates the bulk of its income from commissions worth up to 15.5% of rents but these are accounted for by its company in Ireland, where it benefits from a favourable corporate tax regime.
The San Francisco based business has been valued at £23bn and tax campaigners have questioned its financial arrangements, although Airbnb denies the set up allows it to avoid paying its fair share of UK tax.
Tax barrister, Jolyon Maugham QC, said: “This is the same story as Google and Facebook which is that profits generated from the UK are not taxed in the UK. By using a company in a lower tax country, in this case Ireland, Airbnb looks to have arranged its affairs to avoid tax throughout Europe including the UK.”
A spokesman for Airbnb said: “We don’t make important, long-term business decisions on the basis of taxation”.
“We follow the rules and pay all the tax we owe in the places we do business,” he said. “Corporation tax is a tax on profit, and Airbnb is a young company investing heavily in our future. Airbnb hosts keep 97% of the price they charge to rent their space and the overwhelming amount of money generated by the Airbnb platform stays with hosts and their communities.”
Airbnb was established in 2008 and is now backed by multiple venture capital firms including Google Capital. It claims to have more than two million properties available to rent in 191 countries.
Airbnb’s UK tax payments were detailed in annual reports filed last month by its two British subsidiaries and provide a rare snapshot of the scale of its booming business.
Airbnb has two UK firms to handle payments from around the world and conduct marketing in the UK. While hundreds of millions of pounds in rental payments pass through the companies, earning commission from both the guest and the host, Airbnb’s UK arms recorded £145m as turnover in the UK, of which just £1.4m was taxable profit.
The biggest cost recorded was a £100m foreign exchange loss caused by Airbnb receiving cash for rentals in multiple currencies and delays, sometimes of several months, between receiving payment from a guest and paying it out to a host.
Airbnb said the UK company processes payments from customers around the world on behalf of its Irish HQ. The “significant costs” of that process – such as any foreign exchanges losses – are reimbursed by Ireland at a profit which is then taxed in the UK, it said.
Airbnb said that its international HQ was based in Ireland to “capitalise on Ireland’s global reputation for technology and utilise the vast tech-savvy and bilingual workforce that Ireland has built.”
But Richard Murphy, a chartered account and director of Tax Research UK, said he thought Airbnb was “dumping its foreign exchange losses in this country to get tax relief on them but the income to which these foreign exchange losses relate never comes near the UK”.
“We get none of the upside on tax from Airbnb’s real income, which is taxed in Ireland, but are giving away tax relief on their costs,” he said. “The net result is to significantly increase the overall level of profits Airbnb can enjoy at low tax rates.”
Murphy said cost reimbursement “is not the basis on which international tax rules are meant to work”.
“They are meant to ensure businesses are taxed on a commercial basis. It is not clear that the UK is ensuring that is happening and in the process Airbnb may be winning from our failure.”
Airbnb said this was untrue and its UK arm is taxed on a commercial basis and that cost reimbursement is a common way of doing business.
The accounts also reveal that Airbnb believes “future legislation may negatively impact Airbnb’s ability to operate as it currently does”.
It states: “The sharing economy in which Airbnb operates is a relatively new economic sector and currently the status of legislation governing it can be vague at best.”
• This article was amended on 19 December 2016 to clarify a description of Airbnb Payments UK Ltd’s costs and revenue.
I am a hospital consultant in a cancer-related speciality. I am writing because I am suffering from complete career burnout and don’t know what to do next.
I am in my mid-40s and, to my sadness, I have lost interest in the job that has always been stressful but rewarding over the 20 years or so since I left medical school. It has been a long hard road starting as a busy junior doctor, coping with multiple exams and failures, but eventually making it as a consultant 10 years ago.
Even then, the job continued to be exceptionally busy and challenging work-wise and emotionally, and I now feel that I missed so many important things, particularly a significant part of my boys’ childhood.
I feel listless and tired all the time, and find it difficult to get enthusiastic about professional development and milestones.
What other career options do I have apart from medicine that would pay equally well? I still have to get three children through school and university.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
I have just got off the phone with BT “customer services” in South Shields and, as usual with BT, I am fuming. I decided to check my latest BT bill online – I opted for paperless bills many months ago – only to discover I am being charged £6 a month for access to BT Sport. This is odd, as I never watch it, and nor did I ever agree to pay for it. It seems that as a BT broadband subscriber, I was given free access to BT Sport for a while. But the company has been charging me since August 2015. This is completely outrageous. I asked it a number of times at what point did I agree to pay for BT Sport but have had no response.
It claims to have emailed me to tell me that it would start charging me for this service unless I opted out. It now refuses to refund us.
I truly despair of BT’s treatment of its customers in situations like this. WE, Abingdon
This letter is a timely reminder to all BT broadband customers who get their bills sent electronically to check them, because it is highly unlikely that WE is the only one being charged for a service that they don’t use or want.
Originally, BT Sport was offered for free to all broadband customers whether they used it or not. It then became chargeable in August last year at £5 – since raised to £6 a month.
Somewhat controversially, the company took the view that everyone would automatically be included unless they opted out. BT said at the time that it would backdate refunds, but your letter shows that this has since been dropped.
We took up your complaint and the chairman’s office has agreed to credit you the £84 you wrongly paid plus £16 as a gesture of goodwill.
BT should have originally asked customers to opt into the service, which would have prevented letters like these.
However, it has to be said that if you are a sports fans you are now getting a lot of sport for a relatively small monthly fee on BT – a fraction of that charged by Sky and others for Sky Sports.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Another year of SOS pleas to my consumer column, Your Problems, has drawn to a close, and it seems churlish not to acknowledge the companies who have worked so hard to earn a mention in it.
Over the past 12 months I have discovered why you can’t book a flight if you’re Indonesian, and how a rail company can justify charging an extra £16.60 for the privilege of walking between two connecting stations. I’ve busted the myth that insuring your no-claims bonus prevents your premiums rising if you make a claim, and exposed the travel company which changed a customer’s wife into a man before demanding £124 to change her back, and investigated why doing your laundry can burn your house down.
It’s frequently claimed that big business skimps on customer service. Twelve months of reading through your woes proves otherwise, for the hours and ingenuity multinationals invest in customer experience are limitless. Those creative reasons why they can’t refund you for goods that never showed up, or compensate for a flight that never flew, take time and effort to conjure. And the more persistent the customer, the more effort these companies expend on rebuffing them.
Take, for instance, the data back-up website which told a customer that her backed-up data was irretrievably lost because of moves to “enhance customer experience”, or the mobile phone firm that was unable to help customers whose phone numbers it had given away because they no longer had, well, a phone number. The really cunning ones delay complainants for so long that they can then declare that too much time has elapsed for them to be entitled to a resolution. Or, in the case of one travel firm, they acknowledge a complaint with an automated message stating it has been deleted unread.
When I first began a consumer column 18 years ago, my mailbag was dominated by householders wrestling with the novelty of bulky home computers that turned out not to work, or flailing in limbo as suppliers of the newly privatised utilities kidnapped each other’s customers. Now computers tend to work fine, so long as you don’t expect reliable broadband, and energy firms have left off kidnapping to concentrate on extortion. Since several of the “big six” suppliers upgraded their computer systems, many customers have found themselves in one of two camps: those sent multiple demands for random, unsubstantiated sums; and those begging in vain for any bill so they can pay their dues.
Lately, though, it is mobile companies and budget airlines who have caused you sleepless nights. The former have an irreproachable record when it comes to selling handsets and taking your money. The discord starts when customers expect those handsets to function, because service providers do not always regard your monthly payments as an entitlement to service. Telecommunication companies, it seems, have a shared weakness: they are not very good at communicating, unless it’s in the form of a bill. Budget airlines share a similar blind spot: because their fares are cheap, they seem to reason, passengers shouldn’t assume they’ll get to take off.
While the companies that enrage you might have changed (anyone remember Cable & Wireless?), the offences remain broadly similar. It’s not the fact that the goods you buy are faulty, or the service intermittent, it’s that you have to endure several hours of Vivaldi on hold before facing the brick wall of corporate indifference when something goes wrong.
So, without further ado, here are my 2016 awards for outstanding customer service – that stands out for all the wrong reasons:
Vodafone has really put itself out to earn this one. So manifold are the horror stories I’ve received that Ofcom, the telecoms regulator, seized on them to help its investigation into the company’s unique take on customer service. The result was a £4.62m fine for failing customers. Ofcom’s discovery that customer service staff hadn’t been trained in what constitutes a complaint would have come as no surprise to the couple whose house purchase fell through because Vodafone had wrecked their credit record with a phantom debt, or to those who discovered that non-existent service or terminal illness are not deemed sufficient reason for their contracts to be cancelled.
A round of applause for Thomas Cook, the company (in case you didn’t guess) responsible for charging that customer for giving his wife an unrequested sex change, and telling him that his complaint had been deleted unread. In addition, it also charged him twice for his booking. In contrition, after he turned to us, Thomas Cook upgraded him to premium class – then debited £603 for the privilege. It explained that this is how its system works for processing complimentary upgrades and that he would be refunded – which he was eventually.
Opodo, the online travel agent that takes your money then, according to many of you, goes to ground, could fill my weekly column by itself thanks to the numbers who find their budget break is unexpectedly costly. That might be because the website showed an error as they completed their payment, so they began the transaction again and were charged twice. Or it might be because the company forgot to tell them that their flight had been changed or cancelled so they missed it (or, in the case of one reader, it announced the departure had been changed when it hadn’t). Or even because a booking proved non-existent.
When an elderly customer asked P&O to return his deposit for a cruise, because after three months his booking had not been confirmed, the company declined. Why? Because “human error” was to blame for its lack of service and therefore a refund wasn’t due.
Car hire companies will have to share this one thanks to their habit of debiting customers’ credit cards without warning days after a rental agreement ends to pay for mysterious and expensive damage. With special mention to Goldcar, however, which refuses to hand over the keys until customers who have already bought comprehensive insurance through a rental agency pay handsomely for Goldcar’s own policy. Also to Hertz whose High Wycombe franchise used a biro to alter the payable excess from £1,000 to £3,000 then claimed that a scrape to a hire vehicle cost precisely that sum to repair, although no itemised bill could be produced.
Homebase’s too-good-to-be-true sofas. Scores of you took advantage of its spring sale which offered a £100 credit on top of a 75% discount, but were left sitting on the floor when the orders failed to turn up. For some, the first you heard that the transaction had been cancelled was when you noticed a refund on your bank statement. Homebase blamed a “software glitch” which caused it to order stock that didn’t exist.
“Extraordinary circumstances”. This is the scientific catch-all employed by airlines to get out of paying statutory compensation to passengers whose flights are cancelled or delayed. EC Regulation 261 obliges them to stump up unless the delay is caused by extraordinary, unforseeable events outside their control – so in the airline world all events from late incoming flights to weather are unforeseeable. Courts have thrown out these excuses one by one, but that hasn’t deterred airlines from using them to rebuff all but the most persistent passengers.
A special commendation must go to easyJet which told a stranded honeymoon couple that its policy of overbooking each flight in case of no-shows was “outside its control”.
Ebay – if you’re a buyer, that is. You can purchase a designer top, swap it for a pound of beetroot, claim you were diddled and get your money back. You can buy a bike, race it up and down a mountain range and return it three weeks later claiming a fault. Ebay will refund you. Although this magnanimity is less attractive if you’re the seller left to pick up the tab. Ebay explains that its refund policy, which seems blatantly weighted against sellers, is to make buyers feel “comfortable” shopping in its marketplace.
Npower, Scottish Power and Co-operative Energy are all contenders after updated computer systems generated wildly inaccurate bills or, in many cases, no bills at all. However, The Money Club should be commended, helping itself to multiple debits from subscribers – an error it blames on a software upgrade. One person was relieved of 29 sets of £98 over five years.
■ If you would like to nominate a company for a specific prize please contact me (your.problems@observer.co.uk), and keep your letters coming in. If we can’t change poor customer services we can at least help shame them.
Tax accounts for more than half of the total cost of the average family’s Christmas alcohol shop, a study by the wine and spirits industry has found. While alcohol duties are typically higher per head in Finland, Ireland and Germany, British consumers pay more alcohol tax than the citizens of most other European Union member states.
In the UK, a family spending £171.66 stocking the drinks cabinet for the festive season will hand over £88.19 of that sum to the Treasury. By comparison, the total cost of the equivalent amount of alcohol in France would be £136.89, with just £43.52 going to the taxman.
According to the Wine and Spirit Trade Association (WSTA), which commissioned the research, 50% of the total cost of alcohol in the UK is accounted for by Treasury-imposed duties, while in France the levy represents on average just 32% of the cost.
“Comparing the wine and spirit tax regime in the UK to that in France puts the UK’s high rate of excise duty firmly in the spotlight,” said WSTA’s chief executive, Miles Beale.
The numbers were produced by comparing a festive-season shop consisting of five bottles of wine, two bottles of champagne, two bottles of other sparkling wine, three bottles of spirits, two bottles of port, 24 cans of beer and 12 ciders.
WSTA is warning that the price of wines and spirits will rise in the new year, when manufacturers and importers begin to pass on the extra costs triggered by the fall in sterling’s value that followed the decision to leave the European Union.
“In addition, with inflation levels rising to 1.2% in November, spirits prices will increase and wine will be hit again,” said Beale. “And that is also why it’s vital there is no increase to duty on wine and spirits at the next budget in March. The chancellor can provide welcome relief for businesses that have some extremely testing times ahead.”
Theresa May’s decision to single out Ealing for attack on adult social care at prime minister’s questions is bizarre and unfair (Councils can get social care cash early, says PM, 15 December). Despite significant funding pressures, Ealing council has one of the best re-ablement services in the country, with 93% of older people who use this service still at home three months after hospital discharge, a record we are proud of. Ealing works closely with our local NHS to provide a seamless discharge service: our rate of delays to discharge due to social care issues is average, not the worst.
Since 2010, government cuts have led to a reduction in Ealing’s adult social care budget of nearly 20%. The council tax precepts the government has allowed us are sticking plasters by comparison. I’m proud that, rather than levying a precept on Ealing residents, as the prime minister seems to want us to do, our success in growing Ealing’s economy and building homes has provided us with the resources to provide extra social care funding that more than matches what a precept would raise. We’ve allocated £2.3m extra for social care this year, rising to £4m by 2019, along with a £5m transformation fund to redesign services so fewer people need intensive help in future.
Councils, like Ealing, that are innovating, redesigning and delivering high-quality social care in very difficult financial conditions, while not demanding extra money from just about managing local families, deserve Theresa May’s praise, not her censure.
Cllr Julian Bell
Labour leader of Ealing council
• My Labour-controlled local authority recently announced cuts to its budget of £82m up to 2020 and more than 400 job losses. These are on top of the cuts already implemented of £250m and 2,000 redundancies since 2010. In real terms, the council’s budget will have been cut by 50%. Any small increase to social care funding through higher council tax has to be set in this overall context (Council tax hike considered to cover social care costs, theguardian.com, 12 December).
All over the country, local authorities are facing a similar funding crisis, with accumulating evidence of how vital local services have been decimated and the serious consequences for local communities. No amount of Orwellian double-speak about efficiency savings, partnership working and smart delivery should be allowed to disguise the fact that the loss of skilled workers, the closure of facilities and cutbacks to services are leading to the biggest crisis of local provision ever seen in this country.
It’s time for councillors to reject the logic of imposed austerity. There should be a coordinated campaign by all Labour-led authorities not to set another round of cuts budgets. To the predictable response that the government will threaten to suspend councillors and impose administrators – so what? Nothing could be worse than meekly accepting what is, effectively, the destruction of local government in any recognisable form. They should be leading a campaign to restore real local democracy and funding to provide decent local services. Get up off your knees and fight for the working-class communities you are supposed to represent.
Steven Schofield
Bradford
• Changes to council tax and the social care precept will seem to many nothing more than a temporary fix. There is real concern about the postcode lottery nature of these tax-raising powers intended to fund our ailing social care system.
While the changes to the social care council tax precept from 2% to 3% over the next two years are welcome, they do not provide additional funding. The government has missed the opportunity to bring forward some of the £1.5bn additional funding for social care through the Better Care Fund already announced for 2019/20.
The most deprived areas in the UK derive the lowest proportion of their income from council tax. The government’s intention in allowing councils to increase council tax is to spread the financial burden of the nation’s rising social care bill. But council tax payers in deprived areas may be less likely to be able to afford the increase, and many of these who are on low incomes will already be paying reduced rates.
The UK has a long tradition of providing care to those who need it most. If that is to continue, the government must invest in a robust social care system that can cater for all based on needs and not on geography. From a taxpayer’s perspective this is a zero-sum game. For every £1 not invested in social care, the cost to the NHS is considerably more.
Paul Dossett
Head of Public Sector, Grant Thornton UK LLP
• Gaby Hinsliff is right (Do-it-yourself social care only works for the very rich, 16 December). Grown children’s ability to step in where the state fails to care for their elderly parents becomes increasingly decisive. But with the proposed increase in council tax the state is forcing the unemployed to step in. Since April 2013 the unemployment benefits of grown children have been taxed by 259 councils out of 326 in England. Taxation of the weekly £73.10 jobseeker’s allowance/income support/employment and support allowance of single mothers and vulnerable citizens deemed fit for work by the Department for Work and Pensions will now be increased to require the least able to step in to pay for the care of anyone’s elderly parents.
Tenants are also forced to step in by paying not only the increase in council tax but also increases in rent out of their unemployment benefits since April 2013; that is due to the cuts in housing benefit called “local housing allowance”, “single room supplement” or “benefit cap”. Some of them are struggling to pay off rent, council tax, utility and fines arrears that accumulate during the three-month absence of income caused by a benefits sanction.
The supreme court has noted the injustice of taxing benefits in Mosley v Haringey. “Their income was already at a basic level and the effect of Haringey’s proposed scheme would be to reduce it even below that level and thus in all likelihood to cause real hardship, while sparing its more prosperous residents from making any contribution to the shortfall in government funding.”
Rev Paul Nicolson
Taxpayers Against Poverty
• I have cancer (non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) and I was recently taken by ambulance to Plymouth’s Derriford hospital with a pulmonary embolism (a blood clot on the lung). I was admitted to A&E around 1am but spent more than 12 hours on a trolley until a bed could be found for me on the medical assessment unit (MAU). I was one of many patients – most were elderly and frail – waiting on trolleys where there was very little spare room for any more. Nursing staff told me that the delay was because the MAU could not find beds on other wards for patients ready for transfer. I was also told this problem was caused by these wards struggling to discharge medically fit older people because these patients needed social care that is not available.
My experience is just one example of the crisis facing hospital services around the country. Patient care is suffering as a direct result of the economically misguided and unjust consequences of this government’s austerity programme. This policy should be reversed by central government providing immediate funds directly to local government to enable an equitable and adequate provision of social care services to free up beds in NHS hospitals and relieve the pressures on A&E services. 
Nigel Charles
South Brent, Devon
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Directors of a crashed company have been given the go-ahead to pursue a case for unfair dismissal in a landmark ruling against a business controlled by the former health secretary Stephen Dorrell.
The tribunal ruling allows employees of an insolvent company to sue a business allegedly born out of the ashes of the one that employed them and where there is “commonality of ownership” between the two.
After several attacks on employment protections by recent governments, lawyers said the surprise ruling could potentially pave the way for a landmark legal decision for corporate insolvencies.
Dorrell, who remains a senior figure in the health sector as chairman of the employers’ lobby group, the NHS Confederation, is accused of using a controversial insolvency procedure to move the assets of a publishing company into a new corporate entity owned by himself.
The insolvency made shares owned by Dorrell’s business partners worthless and thwarted their unfair dismissal claim against the company.
After hearing the claim, the employment judge ruled that Dorrell’s new company – Pixel West – must face the unfair dismissal claim instead.
Matti Rogers and his wife, Kate, who brought the claim, said they were delighted by the decision at the West Midlands employment tribunal in Birmingham. The unfair dismissal hearing will take place in May. They allege they were removed from the publishing company, called Project Viva, through a “sham redundancy exercise” that paved the way for Dorrell to then transfer assets out of the business.
The insolvency procedure used by Dorrell – a pre-pack administration – is lawful but controversial, because it allows a company in effect to walk away from its debts. However, this ruling shows that the new company can be made liable for the liabilities of the old company. The judge said there was “commonality of ownership and directorship between the companies so this [action] was hardly out of the blue”.
Dorrell was health secretary between 1995 and 1997 in John Major’s administration and served as a Conservative MP for 36 years until he stood down at the last election.
Project Viva, which published specialist health and motoring magazines, called in administrators in March and was immediately bought by Dorrell’s investment vehicle, Dorson Transform, through a pre-pack administration.
Project Viva was 35% owned by Dorrell’s wife, 30% owned by financier Paul Meier, and 35% by Kate Rogers, whose husband Matti, a publisher, helped to set up the business. Matti Rogers claims he and Kate were pushed out of their roles at the company last summer after opposing Dorrell’s proposals to take over Project Viva. Dorrell said their positions had been made redundant.
Rogers and his wife then launched the unfair dismissal case against Project Viva, but the company was placed into administration just weeks before the hearing. The new hearing in Birmingham took place after Rogers applied for Pixel West to be added to the claim.
This is not the first time that Dorrell has been caught up in controversy. His behaviour was branded “completely immoral” seven years ago after a South African company was left with worthless paper shares after selling Dorrell its UK clothing business. LA Group sold its clothing operations for £1m of shares in Wensum, a company chaired by Dorrell and in which he had a large stake.
However, a month after the deal the assets of Wensum were moved into a new business through a pre-pack administration. While LA Group ended up with nothing, Dorrell had a 15% stake in the new business and collected a £200,000 salary as a director.
Dorrell said at the time he acted in good faith and denied that the acquisition of A&D was part of a pre-arranged plan designed to boost Wensum’s assets before it became insolvent.
He also faced calls to resign as an MP in 2014 after taking on a lucrative role as a health consultant with KPMG, the accountancy firm. Critics claimed it was a conflict of interests because KPMG was looking at bidding for a £1bn contract with the NHS.
Dorrell’s behaviour also drew criticism from staff at Project Viva. An editor of one the magazines it published, Andy Hornsby, sent an email to suppliers and customers after the pre-pack administration to say he was leaving the company.
In the email, seen by the Guardian, Hornsby wrote: “I really should try to write it as a script for a sitcom, except a lot of the stuff between the lines is frankly too implausible.”
In another email directly to Dorrell, the former health secretary is told that the reason for the pre-pack administration is morally objectionable.
Dorrell told the Guardian earlier this year that Project Viva was placed into administration “because the board concluded that it was unable to meet its obligations”.
In relation to the ruling this month, Dorrell said: “The tribunal ruled as it ruled and the issue will be dealt with in the normal way.”
Dorrell said that Pixel West is trading normally.
Mark Gray, senior employment lawyer for Harrison Clark Rickerbys, which represented Rogers, said: “The case throws up interesting legal issues for both employers and employees. It demonstrates that the TUPE [employment protection] regulations can still potentially have teeth, despite what was seen by many as a watering down of employment laws in 2013. Businesses need to be very aware that employment laws still protect employees in a variety of situations and that TUPE laws may generally remain far-reaching.”
Age! Oh, you know, between about 18 and 25.
I said, APPEARANCE! Oh, right. Sorry, it’s a bit loud in here. Well, it depends on the bar. Most bar staff dress in an internationally popular style called “cooler than you are”.
Yeah, I’ve always thought that’s odd. I mean, I’m splashing my cash on a night out, they’re earning minimum wage in a low-skilled job, yet I’m the one who feels uncool. Well, fear not. Your days of relative uncoolness may be numbered, my friend.
Have I won a trendy makeover? People often say I would look better if my entire body was obscured by hair and tattoos. I’m sure you would, but no. You’re finally going to feel cooler than some bar staff because some of them are going to be machines.
Eh? The “world’s first” self-service beer pump with contactless card payments began trials this week at Henry’s Cafe & Bar in Piccadilly, central London. It has been designed as an attention-seeking gimmick by Barclaycard, which says it might launch it at festivals and other places where there are often long queues at the bar.
So now we’re letting computers control our beer? That’s right.
Actually, that’s probably quite wise. How does this thing work? Well, you select a drink on the screen, pay with your card, then place your glass under the spout and watch it fill with ale.
What if I don’t want ale? Tough. Lager is too fizzy to dispense reliably. Everything else is complicated in other ways. You get ale.
Will it refuse to serve me if I’m already drunk, as required by law? Oh, um, yeah. I’m sure Barclaycard has installed a pop-up breathalyser or something.
OK. And how does the machine know I’m older than 18? Apart from my dress sense, I mean. Dunno. You have to be 18 to have some bank cards. Or maybe a bored human has to stand next to the pump watching people use it, like at the supermarket.
And will they be cooler than I am? Almost certainly.
Do say: “I have read this ale’s terms and conditions. Cancel/Agree.”
We bought a repossessed property and the completion date was agreed as Friday 28 October. After three removal vans were loaded with our possessions we discovered that Lloyds, the mortgage lender to the previous owner, had not provided the mortgage redemption statement to the creditor selling the house.
We are a family of four, with four dogs and an elderly lady, and without warning we had to find somewhere to stay. We got a log cabin on a holiday park to accommodate us over the weekend (but had to book it for a week at £650), thinking we would complete on the Monday.
We didn’t. The removal company was charging us a small fortune for each day the vans sat loaded and idle, and on the fifth day when there was still no progress it put our stuff into storage, charging us £4,000 for the unloading and £150 a week for storage.
After a week we had to vacate the log cabin because it had been booked by someone else. We were again homeless and at the last minute found a cottage at a cost of £750 for the week. At the end of that week we were again homeless – and Lloyds had still not provided the certificate nor an explanation for the delay. We returned to the holiday park, this time paying £775 a week. We have only the clothes we stand up in, are running out of money as you can imagine due the unexpected extra costs, and are at a loss as to what to do.
The solicitors for the receiver have threatened legal action against Lloyds. The trustees have contacted Lloyds explaining our dire situation, but for some reason a simple transaction has turned into a nightmare. HD, Knaresborough, North Yorkshire
This is an appalling story of incompetence and neglect that, you say, has affected the health of your elderly relative and so far cost you £15,500.
Another three weeks dragged by after I raised your plight with Lloyds, during which time the bank claimed its hands were tied for reasons undisclosable due to data protection rules. Then, suddenly, it discovered it was because of an inexcusable oversight that it failed to issue the paperwork on time. “The property was subject to a second charge,” a spokesperson says, meaning another creditor had repossessed it.
“The second charge party took steps to sell the property and on 18 October we received a request from the seller’s solicitor to provide a redemption statement, enabling the sale to progress. An error in processing the instruction meant that there was a delay in us issuing the redemption statement, which held up the completion of the sale.”
It’s unlikely this error would have yet come to light without pressure from us. In the meantime you have spent more than eight weeks in temporary accommodation and been fobbed off each time you appealed to Lloyds, of which you are also a customer. The bank is now going to pay you £15,500 to cover your expenses and £6,000 for stress and inconvenience.
The good news is that you are now able to move in, just in the nick of time for Christmas.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
Saving is always said to be a good thing. Not a week passes without a central bank governor or finance minister telling us we don’t save enough.
But they are talking about households and their spare cash. And cash accounts for only a small proportion of the savings held by most people.
These days our accumulated wealth is our savings – and far from being a way to protect us from financial shocks, they are toxic and slowly killing the world’s economies.
Firstly there is the sheer scale of savings held by individuals, companies and governments. Earlier this year the International Monetary Fund felt the need to add it all up and declared it a savings glut.
It says institutional investors such as pension funds, insurance companies and mutual funds, along with the sovereign wealth funds of oil-rich nations and central banks, hold around $100 trillion in assets under management.
This huge sum compares to US GDP of around $18 trillion and the total market value of US-listed companies in 2015 of $19 trillion (which today is more like $25 trillion).
Mostly it is invested in stock markets and property or lent to companies and governments in the form of bonds. The remainder is invested in commodities such as oil, or financial derivatives of various assets and insurance products that hedge any potential losses on those assets.
The unprecedented size of these savings might not matter if investors only wanted a modest return. Unfortunately investors are greedy and there are simply not enough things to invest in that can offer the high returns they demand.
So how do investors react? For decades, they have bullied governments to release assets for sale that can then be leased back at high returns. In the UK, this is why we have privatised utilities and a swath of other safe, previously state-owned, assets in private hands.
Then there is the way most people, businesses and governments have accumulated their savings. Just a quick look at the $100tn total and we can see that most of it is the result of tax avoidance.
The Japanese are famous for their savings and investments. But middle-income families can only save because they don’t pay enough tax for officials in Tokyo to provide basic services. Every year the Japanese government runs a 10% budget deficit, such that its accumulated debt is worth almost 250% of GDP.
The same tax shortfall plays havoc with the UK’s finances, though on a smaller scale. Voters who tend to be older, own a home and have a pension – many of whom are also investors – have voted to pay less and less tax since the 1980s.
Privatisations brought in cash to make up some of the gap, but that hasn’t been enough. Successive governments have funded capital projects off the balance sheet through vehicles like the private finance initiative, which were another way for investors to extract an income.
Why pay tax, voters asked themselves, when you can keep the money and earn a return by lending it to the government (or fleecing the government by investing in a private contractor with a state contract)?
The next thing that makes savings toxic is the way investors have bullied governments into making them safe.
It could have been argued 20 years ago that most of the funds in the IMF’s $100tn were in fact risky investments and totally different from bank savings. But in the last two decades, and especially since the 2008 crash, investments have been considered almost as safe as a regulated deposit.
Property is protected from any significant devaluation by ultra-low interest rates. Regulators might argue that mortgage lenders can fail under the new post-crash regime. But such is the importance of property wealth to consumer confidence that politicians have made it clear prices must be protected to prevent a more general economic meltdown.
The protection offered to the stock market is illustrated by Janet Yellen, the boss of the US Federal Reserve, who said last year that the threat of a stock market slump was a key factor in the central bank keeping interest rates at historical lows.
Now she is raising them, but only in tiny increments and only because the arrival of Donald Trump and his promise of a government-funded spending spree offers a bigger payday than ultra-cheap central bank money.
Pension funds are another element of the $100tn that see themselves as benign if not beneficial. Yet a large proportion of saving is only in the pension ledger after avoiding a 20% – or more likely 40% – tax rate.
If these savers had paid tax first and then saved from their net income, governments would have enough money to provide services without the need for extra borrowing.
The IMF says governments should work harder to attract investor funds to build vital infrastructure and close their budget deficits.
But when investment banks demand between 10% and 15% returns and pension funds think we should be grateful they only want 6% to 9%, the IMF is supporting a rip-off perpetrated by today’s savers on tomorrow’s taxpayers. Instead it should use its intellectual muscle to shift the debate and support higher taxes on wealth.
The Brexit blow to the pound coupled with commodity price hikes is squeezing Britons’ Christmas spending power this year.
A typical household spends an extra £500 in December but the pound’s dramatic tumble since the 23 June referendum means the festive fund is being stretched as the price of everything from Christmas puddings to selection boxes and the latest tech comes under pressure.
British firms are having to pay a lot more for imports, from food ingredients to fuel, with manufacturers’ costs up 13% over the last year – the steepest rise for five years. Some of those higher costs are already being passed on to consumers, and experts have warned households to expect a brisker pace of inflation next year.
“Generally the drivers of food inflation are what’s happening in global commodity markets and recent movements in sterling,” said the Retail Economics analyst Richard Lim. “This side of Christmas retailers are holding back some of the inflationary pressure they are feeling from suppliers and manufacturers because it is a fiercely competitive environment. Next year we expect food inflation to rise fairly steeply because of sterling.”
For now it seems importers and retailers are taking a hit to their own margins rather than choosing to charge more in the shops, but according to the Guardian’s analysis Christmas will give shoppers a taste of higher inflation ahead.
Not everything is more expensive – official figures show food prices in shops are still lower overall than a year ago. A supermarket price war and the rise of discounters such as Lidl and Aldi have helped keep grocery prices low. There is also good news for those who like a Christmas tipple. Wine, beer and spirits are all cheaper than a year ago.
But shoppers should beware of hidden inflation. Manufacturers have been shrinking their products and charging the same price. In other words, you pay the same but get less – a phenomenon known as shrinkflation. A recent example was the storm over the new Toblerone, which has bigger gaps between its chunky chocolate peaks after its manufacturer decided to cut the bar’s weight rather than increase its price.
Stir-up Sunday got a lot more expensive this year as raisins, butter and flour all increased in price.
You get more than one Christmas out of them but the price of artificial trees is being affected by a 46% increase in European steel prices after China slashed production.
Official figures showed clothing prices this November were up almost 1% from a year ago, making them one of the main factors behind a rise in the UK’s overall inflation rate to 1.2%.
While the headline price of spirits is down about 2% from a year ago, according to the Office for National Statistics, a breakdown of the official figures shows whisky has been getting pricier. A nip will cost you £2.73 this year, up from £2.62 a year ago.
Analysts are reporting a 21% rise in the wholesale price of pork, with the surge expected to push up the price of bacon and sausages sold in supermarkets.
Chocolate prices would be higher if the bars weren’t getting smaller as manufacturers shrink pack sizes rather than raise prices. Mondelēz International reduced the size of the 170g Toblerone bars to 150g – equating to a 13% rise in the price per gram.
The Brexit vote has pushed up the prices of laptops, desktop computers and tablets as technology companies seek to adjust to the weaker pound. Apple has hiked the prices of its products in the UK, including Christmas list favourite the iPad. Price rises in September, for example, pushed up the 9.7-inch model of the iPad Pro to £549 from £499.
The Furby Connect has a recommended retail price of £99.99 versus the older Boom version’s £69.99 price tag. However, the Furby Connect is a jazzed up version of the furry critter with a Bluetooth connection and coloured LED eyes – and most retailers are discounting the toy anyway.
A lump of coal in the Christmas stocking is now a more expensive way to scold a naughty child. A 50kg sack of coal now costs £17.62, 29p more than a year ago
With the Brexit process set to begin in earnest, next year could be tough on many people’s finances. Guardian Money is here to help:
Car insurance premiums are set to break through the £600 barrier for the first time next year, as insurers pass on big cost increases and the fresh hike in insurance premium tax announced last month. Premium costs alone are up 16% over the past 12 months, meaning most us are likely to get a nasty surprise when the 2017 renewal lands on the doormat.
You can, however, fight back: shopping around at renewal time is key, but do so in advance. Buyers get significantly lower quotes (£100 less) if they buy 30 days in advance, rather than the day before. We reckon Gocompare is the most user friendly of the comparison websites, but there are plenty more.
Don’t overbuy cover – if you only drive 5,000 miles a year, don’t insure (and pay) for 10,000. And if you can park off-road, do so, and tell your insurer – it will make a big difference. Consider adding a spouse or parent as a named driver (or if you are elderly, a middle-aged son or daughter) as it could reduce the premium by hundreds of pounds.
Don’t soup up your car with sports exhausts, alloy wheels etc – it just means higher premiums. And while we are promised £40-per-policy savings from 
 a crackdown on whiplash, this will be offset by the rise in insurance premium tax to 12% next June.
This has been a pretty good year for many people who have taken out a mortgage, with record low fixed-rate home loans on offer – provided you meet the criteria – and a base rate cut. But is the party coming to an end?
Earlier this month, HSBC, which has been very competitive in its mortgage pricing, withdrew its 0.99% two-year fix, as well as increasing rates on other products. Some brokers and other financial experts are warning that mortgage rates will almost certainly rise in the coming months.
On Thursday the Bank of England left interest rates at their record low of 0.25%. However, Nick Dixon, investment director at investment and -insurance giant Aegon, says: “With inflation moving towards the Bank’s 2% target quicker than expected, the only way is up for interest rates in 2017. Mortgage-holders should consult their advisers now about fixing their rates before they rise.”
According to Moneyfacts.co.uk, best-buy two-year fixes include Norwich & Peterborough building society’s 1.39% deal (maximum loan-to-value of 65%) and Yorkshire building society’s 1.44% rate (maximum LTV of 85%). For five-year fixes rates start at 1.99% from Leeds building society. Someone who can manage a 10%-plus deposit can fix for five years at 2.99% courtesy of West Bromwich building society.
If you are one of the two-thirds of UK households on your energy supplier’s “standard” gas and electricity tariff, you are almost certainly overpaying by £200 – more if you live in a big house. Get yourself on a fixed-price tariff right now. It takes five minutes to switch.
The current stand-out deal is offered by Co-op Energy. It has an £850-a-year fixed-price tariff that runs until February 2018 – a typical £200 saving over the average “big six” standard tariff. But be aware that the Co-op has had a poor customer service record recently.
Moneysupermarket has an exclusive deal with Flow Energy, which may still be available, but is about to be pulled. It costs an average of £877 and is fixed until the end of March 2018. Failing those, search for the best deals at Energyhelpline.com.
Switch to a long-term fix if you can, as prices are set to rise from next March – if the experts are to be believed.
The cost of home insurance has been falling in recent years, but only if you have been switching supplier regularly. Every year at Money we are contacted by readers who have finally woken up to this fact. Having renewed with the same firm each year, they found they were being asked for £1,500 a year. When they compared prices, rivals offered the same cover for £250. Make 2017 the year you say goodbye to being ripped off by your home insurer.
If you haven’t checked your monthly direct debits and other continuous payments then get to it, as some people may find they are still paying for services they cancelled. How about that gym or AA membership you dropped – have the payments actually ceased? Did you cancel your old direct debit when you switched energy provider? Amazon Prime’s £79 annual payment repeatedly catches out some consumers. Remember, the direct debit guarantee requires banks to refund wrongly taken payments without quibbling.
Anyone relying on savings income had a pretty torrid 2016, and the outlook for next year isn’t much better. With inflation currently running at 1.2%, savers getting less than that are seeing their savings dwindle. Even the top-paying easy-access accounts are only offering 1%. If you are prepared to lock your money away for a year, OakNorth Bank is paying 1.41%, or 1.56% on its two-year bond. The Charter Savings Bank is paying 1.38% on its one-year deal.
Many bank accounts now pay better rates. Santander’s 123 account is paying 1.5% on balances up to £20,000. The Bank of Scotland classic account is paying 3% on balances of £3,000-£5,000. Nationwide’s FlexDirect account pays 5% on £2,500, but only for a year.
Five-year fixed-rate bonds now pay a little over 2% at best, but that arguably does not look like a good plan, as interest rates look likely to start to rising in 2017 – albeit slowly. Consider using savings to lower your mortgage instead.
Last year, 890,000 people filed their tax return late and faced a £100 fine, and the addition of punitive interest on any money owed. If you still haven’t filed it three months after the 31 January deadline then it gets much worse: daily penalties of £10 per day, up to a maximum of £900, are added. Don’t be a Christmas turkey – get it in on time.
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
I’m thinking of buying my partner an annual airport executive lounge pass for about £250. His family is in France and he flies about 10 times a year. Are exec lounges all they’re cracked up to be? Or can you recommend an alternative (cheaper) gift for a regular flyer?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
How was your personal finance scorecard in 2016? Many will feel wounded by the Brexit result, but the reality is that 2016 has not been unkind to the pound in your pocket. Generalising about the personal experiences of 65 million individuals is wildly ambitious, but it has never put a newspaper columnist off before, so here goes …
Your wages went up
 Average pay rose from £463 to £475 a week (£24,076 to £24,700 a year) excluding bonuses, according to the Office for National Statistics. That’s an extra 2.5% a year, although for the lowest paid the story was better, with a 7.5% rise as the National Living Wage of £7.20 was introduced in April for the over-25s, replacing the previous figure of £6.70. But if you generally don’t feel any better off, you’re right – the governor of the Bank of England admitted we are in the midst of a “lost decade” of wage growth, unknown for more than a century.
Prices stayed flat(ish)
 Inflation, as measured by the CPI, was 1.2% in the year to November. So workers who enjoyed the average 2.5% wage rise should be 1.3% better off this Christmas. Not a lot, but better than recent years when inflation outstripped any miserable rise in pay. What’s really helped has been falling grocery prices – down 1.7% over the year, according to the British Retail Consortium, although Toblerone lovers suffered as it got gappier, and Marmite became the poster child of post-Brexit price increases. Petrol prices are also firmly on the up. This time last year we were writing about a festive boost as prices headed below £1 a litre, but now the average has shot up to £1.15. What’s more, that dusty old index, the RPI – the one the government prefers not to use because it always seems higher than CPI – is up 2.2% over the year so, on that basis, it nearly cancels out the average rise in wages.
House prices and rents started to cool
 Longed-for falls in house prices have only materialised at the top end of the London market, but there are welcome signs that the steam is finally coming out of Britain’s over-inflated market. The average UK house price was £217,000 in October 2016, the last date the ONS has data for. Sadly, this is £14,000 higher than in October 2015, but month-on-month was unchanged. Prices in the City of London fell fastest, down 8.8% over the year. Most commentators are forecasting prices flat-lining in the UK next year.
Rental indices are notoriously unreliable, but there’s good news there, too. Average rents in the UK rose to £898 in November, up 3.1% over the year, but they fell in October. In London they were up just 1.6% over the year, with mounting evidence that they have been falling since the referendum result. And in a surprise, but hugely welcome, move announced in the autumn statement, letting fees to tenants are to be banned, although we don’t know quite when.
Investment Isas had a boom year
 Stock markets soared in the wake of the Brexit result and the Trump victory, with the FTSE 100 index currently running 16% up over the year and the S&P 500 on Wall Street hitting a record high. Workers with defined contribution pension schemes will have seen the value of their savings increase, although pegged back by bond holdings where gains have been near invisible over the year, and negative recently. Much of the rise in UK share prices is down to the fall in sterling, but is welcome nonetheless.
But holidaymakers suffered
 By mid-August the pound had fallen to just €1.15, down nearly a fifth on the summer before, and some bureaux de change were giving less than €1 for £1. Sterling has crawled back a bit, but foreign holidays look set to remain pricey.
What about 2017? Earnings growth is faltering and prices rising. Worse, the axe falls on tax credits in April, hitting the poorest families hardest.
A chartered accountant and his wife are £1,100 out of pocket after discovering that their son’s old bank account number has been given to someone else. The couple have learned to their cost something that every person who banks online should know: it’s not just things such as paper and glass that are recycled. Banks can, and do, recycle closed account details.
David and Lyndsay Boyack from the Scottish city of Stirling are the latest people to discover that transferring money via online banking can be fraught with peril. But this wasn’t a fat finger error, whereby you erroneously key in the wrong account number and the money goes to an unintended recipient; and it also wasn’t one of those nasty email scams where someone is duped into paying money to a fraudster posing as their builder/carpenter etc.
In this case, Lyndsay made several separate payments into what she thought was her 33-year-old son’s current account, but is actually now someone else’s account – and this person is refusing to give the money back.
Her son’s name, account number and sort code were among the list of payees saved on her system, but unbeknown to her they were no longer her son’s banking details. In fact, he had closed that account some years previously and subsequently opened another one with the same bank, the Clydesdale. What shocked the couple were the revelations that both the same account number and sort code from their son’s old account had been given to someone else, and that no one within the banking system seems to be able to compel this individual to hand back money that isn’t theirs.
The Boyacks’ experience shines a spotlight on the little-known world of current account recycling. Did you know, for example, that your bank account could be “second-hand”? Very little information is available on this, but it is understood that banks typically wait at least three years before recycling closed account details. Clydesdale has confirmed that once one of its accounts has been closed for four years, both the number and sort code can be given to a new customer.
Not all banks do this – HSBC doesn’t, and neither does Santander. And it may be the case that of those banks that do do it, some split the account number and sort code. If all old accounts were recycled to different branches, this would presumably have prevented the Boyacks’ error.
If proposed new rules for online payments outlined last month were in place now, what happened to the Boyacks would not have been able to occur. In future, when a bank customer transfers some money, they will receive a message matching the sort code and account number with the name of the recipient account holder, so they can double check they are paying the right person (see below).
David Boyack, who is 64, admits the whole experience has left the couple frustrated. However, he says they will continue their efforts to recover the money because otherwise it would suggest to him and his wife that “crime does pay”.
The Boyacks made four online transfers of funds from the couple’s Royal Bank of Scotland account over a period of 15 months, unwittingly using the details of their son’s old account, which he had closed in 2006 after moving to Glasgow. The first transfer was £50 in December 2014, followed by £100 in February 2015, £150 in December 2015, and £800 in February of this year.
The couple only realised there was a problem when their son told them the £800 had not arrived. They then realised the same thing had happened three times previously. Initially the couple thought they were the victims of a fraud, and contacted their bank, RBS. When it became clear what had occurred they complained to the Clydesdale. It eventually told them in August that it was unable to give them any more help. In a letter it said it had written twice to the customer who now has those account details to request the money back, “but we have had no response”. The Boyacks then wrote a letter which they asked to be forwarded to the customer, but again there was no reply.
Intriguingly, through a spot of detective work they managed to get hold of the customer’s name and also where he works (a cafe in the Manchester area), although they don’t know his home address. “He’s a young chap and we imagine he has spent the money,” says David. His son managed to contact the man via Facebook, without joy, and now David has sent him a recorded delivery letter, to his workplace, asking him to pay back the debt at a rate of £75 a month or £20 a week.
The couple took their complaint to the Financial Ombudsman Service, but it ruled that the Clydesdale “hasn’t done anything wrong in this situation” and had “made a reasonable attempt to try to retrieve the funds”.
David told Guardian Money that “we do accept some contributory negligence … we [made the transfers] four times”. He acknowledges that if their son had noticed that the first £50 had not arrived then they wouldn’t be where they are now. But he says the FOS has shown itself to be “toothless”, with no solution offered to prevent a recurrence.
“Clydesdale ‘made a reasonable attempt’ – I would have expected more. They contacted their client twice. He did not provide debit authorisation, so that’s it?” he says. “The recipient’s crime is that of unjust enrichment, and I am very keen that he pays back what he has ‘taken’ from us.”
Boyack adds: “Why is there no flag on recycled accounts? Or better still, why is there not a split of the old account number for re-use with a different sort code? Is there no way to validate the recipient’s name as well, to avoid depositing funds in the wrong account in error?”
In a statement Clydesdale Bank told us: “The issues raised have been investigated thoroughly and, while we sympathise with Mr Boyack, regrettably, given the circumstances, we could not provide a refund, and despite our efforts we were unable to retrieve the funds in question. The Financial Ombudsman also upheld our decision not to refund.”
It adds that recycling account numbers is “common practice due to a limit on the amount of numbers available. In this case, the account number had not been used for eight years”.
A system is being introduced in the UK aimed at preventing people from sending payments to the wrong account, either by accident or as a result of a scam. But the bad news is that it isn’t due until 2018-2020.
The “confirmation of payee” system will mean that when someone types in a sort code and account number to transfer some money, they will receive an instant message saying something like “Is ‘Joe Smith’ the person/business you intended to send the money to?” Crucially, this will appear before the money leaves the person’s account.
Many people are unaware that currently the name of the person/company they are paying is effectively irrelevant as banks don’t do any cross-checking.
As the proposals require a major systems change to enable banks to instantly identify recipients, it will be a couple of years before people see it. So what can they do now? As Clydesdale Bank says: “Always double-check the account details you are sending funds to, and check the recipient has received those funds.”
Perhaps it is time to do an end-of-year spring clean of your list of payees and check that everyone’s bank details are up to date.
The FTSE 100 index of Britain’s biggest stock market-listed companies has enjoyed its strongest year since 2009, jumping from 6,137 at the start of the year to touch nearly 7,000 this week. Wall Street’s S&P 500 has hit record highs, with British investors gaining even more in sterling terms because of the fall in the currency. This has meant that some of the biggest funds popular with small investors – such as M&G’s £6.3bn Global Dividend – have made gains of nearly 40% over the past year.
But not everyone has shared in the party. The single biggest fund in the UK, Standard Life’s £26.3bn Global Absolute Return Strategies, has managed to lose money when almost everyone else has been coining it. The fund is down 3.3% over the past 12 months, compared with the 17% gain made by UK index-tracking funds over the same period.
Star fund manager Neil Woodford has also had a poor year, making just 2.7% over the past 12 months for investors in his popular £9.2bn equity income fund.
The prize for the best performance of any fund in the UK goes to the little-known JFM Gold, which has given investors a return of 128% over the past year. Unfortunately, it’s only a £20m minnow, so we took a look at the big funds instead. M&G Global Dividend performed best, rising 39.4%, while Fundsmith Equity was up 28.2%. Both are heavily invested in Wall Street-listed stocks, which have rocketed in sterling terms. For example, Microsoft (a big holding in both funds) was trading at $54.80 at the start of the year and was $63.14 this week – a rise of 15%. But in sterling terms that translated into £37.27 at the beginning of the year, and £49 now – a rise of 31%. While the post-Brexit plunge in sterling will make holidays more expensive for everyone in 2017, it has turbo-charged returns for pension and Isa holders with investments in big US companies.
Billionaire Brexiter and hedge fund manager Crispin Odey reportedly made millions around the referendum, but investors who put money into his Odey Absolute Return fund won’t be smiling. It was the second worst performing fund of the year, losing 15.7% and beaten to the bottom only by an absolute return fund from Argonaut Partners. These hedge fund-style investments became popular a decade ago, but in 2016 almost everything with the words “absolute return” in their name turned into absolute rubbish. Sadly, we can assume their managers will still receive giant pay packets for their sterling performance.
So what will be the winning formula for 2017? We polled some of the leading managers and here’s what they think:
The former BBC economics correspondent reckons Donald Trump’s spending will boost the US economy in the near term, but US shares look fully priced, and Westminster has cloth ears about the Brexit issues facing London banks.
“Politics and policy are likely to dominate the headlines again in 2017. Voters have decided against business as usual and, increasingly, investors are also expecting a change. Whether either will be satisfied remains to be seen.
“The eurozone and Japan have come to the conclusion that when it comes to pushing down long-term interest rates, you can have too much of a good thing. So investors should not expect capital gains on bond holdings to compensate for low interest rates as they have in the past. People have been predicting a turn in the bond market for several years, only to see bond prices reach new highs. But in the past few years, inflation was heading down, not up. This time it really does look different.
“Eight years into a slow recovery marked by low productivity and weak investment, increased [Trump’s plans for] US public spending to support long-term potential growth could be positive for the global economy. But the policies Trump has suggested spending on are not those that economists would say are likely to give the highest return.
“In terms of the big picture, the S&P 500 has risen by 292% on a total return basis since early 2009, and a 50/50 portfolio of global bonds and equities has delivered an average annual return of 7.6%. That is higher than the 5.1% average annual return between 1998 and 2008, despite the weaker performance of the global economy.
“The most worrying thing [about Brexit] is how unrealistic the debate in the media and Westminster is compared with what anyone working in a major company or financial institution would tell you about the logistics involved – let alone trade negotiators and financial regulators, who think in terms of two- or three-year transition periods for even small demergers or regulatory reforms.
“The idea of having a transition is being read as a remainer plot to buy time to stay in the EU. That is the best way to have businesses in the UK and the EU planning for the worst. The transition deal we need is for both sides to agree upfront that whatever the outcome of the negotiations, nothing will happen on the ground for two years after that deal.”
Don’t even try to predict the future, says the manager of the £8.7bn Fundsmith Equity fund.
“I am amazed by how much time and effort people waste trying to guess what will happen in known unknowns, such as Brexit, China, commodities, interest rates, oil prices and the US presidential election. Then there is the problem of unknown unknowns: the event that may cause a major move in the market may be one that no one has even spotted.
“So what should investors focus on? I would suggest just three things: invest in the shares of good businesses, stick to investing in things you understand and don’t worry too much about valuations. If you are a long-term investor, buying shares in a good business is more important than valuations. If you are not a long-term investor, what are you doing investing in the stock market?”
On the watch list: a rise in inflation, greater volatility as politics takes centre stage and a possible end to the 35-year bond rally.
“Politics developed a nasty habit of gatecrashing the markets in 2016. The UK’s decision to leave the EU and Trump’s victory were, for some, like opening the door to an uninvited guest at a party that was going fine without them. Expect more of the same in 2017.
“While the first 100 days of Trump’s presidency will be scrutinised for policy initiatives, Europe is likely to move centre stage next year with elections in France, Germany and the Netherlands. The outcome of these may seal the victory of anti-establishment, anti-globalisation forces that have played a large part in the outcome of the EU referendum and Trump’s election.
“The implementation of protectionist policies would have only a limited impact in the dematerialised world we live in, where so much trade is in services and takes place online. Emerging economies may have more to fear, especially in light of Trump’s calls for 45% trade tariffs on Chinese goods, but even here there is hope, given over half of all Asian trade is done in the region.
“Trump’s plans to use tax cuts and increases in infrastructure spending to boost the US economy seems to be sending a clear signal that government fiscal stimulus and not central bank monetary policy should do the heavy lifting to galvanise the economy.
“Bond markets have reacted accordingly, with the expectation that all this stimulus will lead to greater inflation. The question remains whether the sell-off in the bond market marks the beginning of the end in the 35-year bond market rally.
“For stocks, inflation expectations are likely to influence outcomes in 2017. The return of inflation should benefit banks, which will earn more as central banks start to lift interest rates to keep a lid on rising prices, but also the metals, mining and energy sectors, as a pick-up in economic growth boosts demand for their products.”
Get ready for the Trump boom
“The global cyclical upswing looks set to run further into 2017, supported by proactive fiscal policies from the new US president. Trump’s aggressive infrastructure and tax-cutting agenda may yet be watered down in Congress, but we consider it likely that much of it will make it through, with material implications for US growth and earnings.
“The current momentum in the US economy, boosted by the proposed Trump agenda, could deliver double-digit earnings growth in both 2017 and 2018. A $600bn infrastructure package could add around 0.25% to US growth, while a cut in the corporate tax rate from 35% to 15% could add 10% to US earnings growth for 2018.”
Forecasts made by investment banks such as Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan and Barclays Capital are only marginally better than flipping a coin, and if you hold on to their “hot picks” longer than a few months you will almost certainly lose money, according to new research.
Intertrader, a spread betting firm, examined stock predictions from so-called (and highly paid) gurus at 16 investment banks, tracked them over the following 12 months and compared them to the returns on just putting your money into a savings account or a stock market index such as the S&P 500 on Wall Street.
“Investment banks’ recommendations are only marginally better than a coin flip,” says Intertrader. “The banks we looked at only managed to predict the correct direction their hot picks would go 55% of the time. And that is actually the kindest we could be – holding their predictions for longer just meant worsening results.”
Investors who bought and sold an investment bank recommendation within 30 days on average made a gain of just 0.8%. If they held it for 90 days, it moved to a loss of 1.48%, while over a year the average loss from buying an investment bank recommendation was 4.79%.
“We found that if you put the money you would have invested in a 3% high-interest bank account instead, your returns would generally be higher,” says Intertrader, which has created a Gurudex index that analyses investment banks.
The firm says the findings serve as a reminder of Warren Buffett’s words of advice on the value of stock market forecasters: “We have long felt that the only value of stock forecasters is to make fortune-tellers look good. Even now, Charlie [Munger] and I continue to believe that short-term market forecasts are poison and should be kept locked up in a safe place, away from children and also from grownups who behave in the market like children.”
I am a salaried solicitor in my late 40s, employed by a medium-sized firm. I was recruited to build and run a department 10 years ago, and by 2010 we were a team of six. One of those I recruited, who is younger, indicated he wanted a managerial role, and three years later the firm decided to appoint him as team leader after I indicated I was fed up with managing (which involved much tedious administrative work), and he showed enthusiasm to step in.
I was offered a small performance-related bonus as an incentive to generate fees. Three years on the firm has announced this employee has been made a salaried partner on the basis of his managerial contribution.
I now feel overlooked and under-appreciated. Although I no longer have a managerial role, I generate twice as much income as the team leader, have been in the company twice as long, and am much older.
It also feels more hurtful as I was involved in recruiting this person.
I know I am seen as quiet and compliant, and it is true that I tend not to make a fuss. I am not looking for prestige, but I do like to feel wanted and appreciated. Instead, I feel rather humiliated, but it feels petty to complain.
I really like my job and get on well with the rest of my team (including the team leader). Also, the salary is OK. Should I swallow my pride and simply soldier on, or raise the issue ?
I can fully understand your feelings. On one hand, you know you can hardly complain since you chose to renounce your managerial responsibilities some years ago; on the other, your company’s pay structure is clearly based more on job title than contribution, and that rankles.
I suggest you write a very carefully considered note to your management. Don’t try to address the issue in person – it’s a bit too complicated and you might find yourself getting flustered.)
Say that you don’t regret having given up your managerial role several years ago, because it has freed you to generate income and you believe that other able employees might also choose to follow this path if it was openly acknowledged by the firm to be an accepted option. But point out that, at the moment, promotion to a management function is the only public recognition a staff member can expect or strive for, which may encourage some to follow the management route even though they are temperamentally less suited.
What you’re suggesting is the creation of a new title (perhaps no more than the addition of the word “senior” to an existing title) that publicly distinguishes those who make a significantly greater commercial contribution. Say you hope this would provide an additional incentive to those, such as yourself, who hope to progress not through ever-greater management responsibility but through ever-greater income generation.
Make it absolutely clear that you just believe that such an addition to existing internal signs of recognition could be of considerable benefit. You stand a good chance of a favourable response.
• Circumstances change in firms, so new recruits may get better deals. Often we carve out new roles (and enjoy doing so), and when we move on to new challenges others may benefit. You knew yourself well enough to choose quality of life over admin, which was brave.
It sounds to me like there is more to you than your job. Enjoy life, and if your nose is rubbed in your colleague’s success then leave. It is a big world out there. jjal44
• You need to swallow your pride. I work for an investment bank and it is often difficult for younger people to lead senior members. Try to be professional and learn from that team member rather than complain. Fulhamred
• I made this choice 10 years ago having been a manager for many years and became a full-time consultant. While it felt odd for a while, I am now appreciated for my experience and knowledge (I am 61), the amount of earnings I bring in, and my ability to mentor and train new employees. Markanthony2
I am a self-employed Tefl teacher in London. I set up my business in 2012 and have been working hard on my website and blog. I really enjoy what I do, but the problem is that I don’t get that many inquiries because my website isn’t in the first few pages of Google.
I advertise through Gumtree but it’s £100 a week for a featured ad. I’ve tried Google adwords but it’s also very pricey. How can I advertise or get funding to build my business.
You shouldn’t be looking to raise more money until you know what you plan to spend it on. As you’ve discovered, search engine optimisation (or SEO) can be an expensive business. There are outfits online that offer to give your website more prominence for relatively little outlay. I’ve no idea if they deliver and maybe you’ve tried them. If not, you might give them a cautious look. My own suggestion is far more primitive but certainly a lot cheaper, and is based on the fact you’re not looking for vast numbers of students.
You will know better than I do the areas of London where foreign students tend to congregate. You’ll also know which nationalities they tend to be. I suggest you publicise your website – and your phone number – on good old-fashioned postcards displayed (for very little money) in newsagents and other shop windows in the most promising areas. Write in the languages of the students whose business you were hoping to attract. It will involve quite a bit of initial legwork, but you should find out within a month or so whether it’s working.
• Word of mouth is always good, so encourage current students to recommend you to a friend – maybe offer a discount if they do (10% for bringing someone new in). Tippingpoi
• On funding, there may be small grants from charities or local authorities if you can phrase your proposal along the lines of: this is for the community/to help integration/to support women who are blocked from independence/employment due to lack of English language skills etc. christinej
• Tefl teachers tend to go overseas to teach English. Foreign students who come to England to learn English tend to go to language schools.
I do have one suggestion, however, and that is to explore foreign companies in the UK which may want an English teacher to visit and give lessons. Heliopower
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
You can let the music play all night long in these properties, from Cumbria to Wrexham
The open-plan living, dining and kitchen area meld with a balcony that has views over the 1.2 acres, so guests can flow unimpeded from loungers to table to sofa while you supervise the stove. You have to haul the weekly shop upstairs since this is topsy turvy living, with the four bedrooms below. Offers over £345,000. CKD Galbraith , 01463 224343
Poundland’s advertising once trumpeted “Yes! Everything’s £1!” but that pledge could be ditched as the bargain chain’s new owners move into clothing sales.
Andy Bond, the former Asda boss who now heads Poundland as the boss of Pepkor Europe, an arm of South African group Steinhoff International, which bought the retailer for £610m in September, said he wanted to introduce the group’s Pep & Co clothing to every store – and it would not all be priced at £1.
Full 2,500 sq ft Pep & Co outlets will go into 10 Poundland stores from next February and Bond said there was room for them in at least 50 of Poundland’s 900 outlets. Smaller stores will feature a few racks of clothing, focusing on kids and womenswear.
“The relationship between Pep & Co and Poundland will become increasingly significant. My ambition is that, over time, Pep & Co will become to Poundland like George is to Asda,” said Bond.
The model follows that of GHM!, the six-store budget retail chain launched by Bond in the summer which will now be folded into Poundland.
Bond said no decision had been made on what would happen to the pricing of Poundland’s other products but he admitted that experiments were taking place. For more than a year, the chain has been occasionally discounting items to 90p or 80p or pushing bigger items for £8 or more.
Bond said: “We will always anchor Poundland around the trust of £1 pricing but the research from the business isn’t that people shop there because things are £1 but because they get amazing value. There are some areas where sticking to £1 doesn’t let you have a credible offer - like toys and clothing.”
Bond said trying out a range of prices was something all single price retailers in the UK were looking at. “The journey pound stores are going on is the same as the dollar stores in the US,” he said. “The vast majority of them have moved from single price to multi-price - from one price to a small number of prices.”
The fall in the value of the pound against the dollar, the currency in which much of the non-food goods sold in Poundland are bought in from the far east, is only likely to add to the pressure for change.
Single price retailers have less options to cope with inflation. In the past, it has meant “shrinkflation” – reducing the size of packs so that they can still meet the £1 target, but that has attracted criticism from consumer groups.
Bond said: “I’d be foolish to say that we don’t shrink products on occasion as we clearly do but there are other solutions – like moving to own label versions or just pushing back on suppliers.”
He said Poundland could choose to stop selling items which it did not think were good value and said predictions of inflation in the price of clothing, food and other goods next year was ”slightly hypothesising”.
Bond said Poundland had taken out insurance against its exposure to the dollar well into next year and there were factors at work in the global economy that may help to offset the 15% fall in the value of the pound since June.
“The Chinese currency has moved so you can negotiate better cost prices in China while Chinese industry is not having the best of times so there is extra capacity and that can also make things easier,” Bond said. “It is not obviously true that we are going to see retail inflation in goods denominated in dollars.”
Regardless of the inflation threat, Poundland has been experiencing difficulties recently. Pretax profits crashed nearly 84% to £5.9m in the year to 27 March and like-for-like sales dropped 3.9% as Poundland suffered from indigestion after swallowing rival 99p Stores – a takeover that took more than a year to complete partly because of the intervention of the competition watchdog.
Competition from the major supermarkets also increased as they cut prices to become more competitive with the likes of Poundland and grocery discounters Aldi and Lidl.
Bond said Poundland’s performance had now improved and he was optimistic about the prospects for the Christmas trading period. He admitted the market was tough but said Poundland would benefit from getting back to basics after bedding down the former 99p Stores.
“Poundland used to be famous for the rate it brought new items to the market. What you’ll find over the next 12 months is more getting back to what the business does really well – great value and interesting new low-price items. We will be more innovative and fleet of foot,” he said.
The Pensions Regulator (TPR) has fired a warning shot at Sir Philip Green by agreeing its biggest ever settlement with a private company in a case with similarities to BHS.
Coats Group, one of the biggest manufacturers of sewing threads in the world, has agreed to pay more than £255m into its pension scheme after the regulator started legal proceedings against it.
John Ralfe, a pensions consultant, said Green should feel “very, very uncomfortable” about the deal.
“This is the most important settlement the Pensions Regulator has ever reached,” he said. “With all other warning notices [of legal proceedings], the company is already bust, so the regulator has been picking over the carcass in the bankruptcy courts.
“There are clear parallels with BHS – the parent company has no legal obligation for the subsidiary’s pension scheme and there is no obvious breach of rules, but the regulator has been tough and got a large contribution from the parent.”
The regulator has started legal proceedings against Green and Dominic Chappell, the former owners of BHS, in an attempt to fill the £571m deficit in the retailer’s pension scheme. Last month, it issued warning notices to Green, Chappell and their companies outlining why they are liable to make financial contributions to the pension scheme.
TPR is understood to be seeking about £350m from Green. Six months ago, the billionaire tycoon promised to MPs that he would “sort” the problems facing the BHS pension scheme, but a deal is yet to be agreed.
Frank Field, the Labour MP and co-chairman of the parliamentary committee that investigated the demise of BHS, said: “What a fantastic Christmas gift it would be to the 20,000 pensioners counting on Sir Philip if he were to keep that promise now.”
It also emerged on Friday that Green is working on plans to open as many as 80 Topshop stores across China. Green owns Topshop alongside the US private equity firm Leonard Green.
TPR’s previous largest settlement was a £184m lump sum payment it won for the Lehman Brothers pension scheme after the collapse of the investment bank.
The pension schemes connected to Coats have a combined estimated deficit of £565m. The regulator issued warning notices to Coats in 2013. The dispute centred on the company’s plan to hand the bulk of the £700m it raised from the sale of assets and businesses to shareholders rather than the struggling pension schemes.
The settlement between Coats and TPR shows it could take years for the BHS saga to be resolved but also that the regulator is prepared to continue negotiations with a company about a deal even after starting legal proceedings.
Nicola Parish, the executive director of frontline regulation at TPR, said: “This is a substantial settlement of our case where neither the employers nor the targets were insolvent. It shows we can and will use our existing powers against a solvent employer if that is the right thing to do.
“This case is a great example of how, even after warning notices have been served, TPR, the company and the trustees can work together to achieve a good outcome for members without the need to formally enforce our powers through the determinations panel.
“We will continue to take a commercially minded and pragmatic approach when pursuing the use of our powers to achieve good outcomes for scheme members.
“In this case, the settlement will substantially improve the funding of the two schemes and also strengthen the employer covenant supporting those schemes.”
What’s going for it? Those wily French! No sooner had they stormed the Bastille than they had designs on storming us. Again. The last invasion of Britain took place on 22 February 1797, just outside Fishguard, though it seems more omnishambles than shock and awe. Two of the three prongs of attack were scuppered by bad weather; the third was marred by a right old shower. Many opted to get drunk and loot farmhouses; the rest were seen off after a couple of days by reservists and locals, including folk heroine Jemima Nicholas who, it’s reputed, rounded up a dozen Frenchies with nothing more than a pitchfork. That’s the spirit. After which Fishguard and its mini-me Newport returned to business as usual, catching herring and supping ale. Today, they’re rather idyllic, with their boats bobbing in the harbour, their wooded slopes and tranquil beaches, while tourists and downshifters hungry for the Pembrokeshire Experience invade Tenby and the south coast, armed with selfie sticks and demands for artisan ice-cream.
The case against They’re remote, but that kind of goes with the territory.
Well connected? There’s a station, but few trains: three a day to Carmarthen (50 mins), a couple of direct trains a day to Cardiff (2-3hrs). Driving: half-hour drives to Haverfordwest and St David’s, an hour to Carmarthen, 90 mins to Swansea. Buses to Haverfordwest, Cardigan and St David’s.
Schools Primaries: Fishguard’s Glannau Gwaun and Holy Name Catholic are “adequate”, Newport’s Bro Ingli is “good”, Estyn says. Secondaries: Fishguard’s Bro Gwaun is “adequate”.
Hang out at… Cnapan or the Golden Lion, both in Newport; the Fishguard Arms or the Royal Oak in Fishguard, where the Frenchies got drunk.
Where to buy Fishguard is a game of three halves: the pretty Lower Town down on the harbour, all wooded slopes, pebbledashed cottages, slipways and seaweed; the main town up the hill, with fine sea views, whitewashed or brightly painted town houses and terraces; and Goodwick, home to the ferry and train station, and a more humdrum affair. Newport, on the other side of Dinas Head, is smaller and quieter, straggly with old stone houses tumbling to the beach. Large detacheds and town houses, £300,000-£400,000. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £150,000-£300,000. Semis, £110,000-£250,000. Terraces and cottages, £80,000-£125,000. The rental market is teeny.
Phil Rowson “The Cambo pub, short for Cambrian: a proper local for young and old, families, regulars and drop-ins.”
Angela Griffiths “The Gourmet Pig deli for Welsh cheeses, wines and beer – they serve great coffee, too. The Royal Oak pub has a fantastic folk night every Tuesday.”
• Live in Fishguard and Newport, Pembrokeshire? Join the debate below.
Do you live in Newport, Isle of Wight? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 20 December.
Sunday night at 8pm is now the peak time for online shopping, according to new data on the spending patterns of millions of consumers.
Rather than being riveted to Planet Earth II or the X Factor final, data from Lloyds Bank suggests the British public are “second screening” on their sofas, shopping as much as watching.
The figures also reveal how at 11am on a Monday morning millions of people are not really working but are buying high-price items after visiting the shops at the weekend.
Lloyds said that while Sunday at 8pm is the peak for online shopping in terms of credit card transactions, the peak in terms of the value of items bought is on Mondays at 11am.
The figures, based on transactions between September 2015 and August 2016, confirm the growing trend for shoppers to treat stores as showrooms for goods, where they inspect items physically but don’t buy. Instead, they return home to compare prices and decide to make purchases on a Sunday night or Monday morning.
Paul Gordon, managing director of credit cards for Lloyds Bank, said: “It’s likely that the peak we see in online spending by value on a Monday is driven by those who use the weekend to find the goods they want in store, then shop online to make sure they get the best deals as well as by retailers who offer sales and discounts over long weekends, often ending on a Monday.
“As for online spending by volume, it looks like we’re most likely to spend online on a Sunday evening while we’re watching The X Factor or Planet Earth.”
Andy Mulcahy of IMRG, the UK trade body for online retailers, said Monday morning used to be the busiest time for online retailers, as customers relied on desktop computers at work to make purchases, but Sunday night has become the peak as people have shifted to using smartphones.
The switch in spending to Sunday nights has also forced retailers to operate vast warehouses open 24 hours to meet demand and promises of immediate delivery – and replace people with robots.
Early next year Amazon will open the UK’s largest ever warehouse, close to Tilbury docks in east London, partly staffed by robots, which will “help speed order processing time and reduce walking time”. Using robots means 50% more items can be stocked per square foot, it said. 
It said its “Prime Day” record for delivery stands at 10 minutes and 11 seconds. A customer clicked on a Playstation video game at home in Beeston and received it just 10 minutes later via the company’s Leeds distribution centre.
But despite the phenomenal growth in online shopping in the UK – which is higher than in France, Spain and Italy combined – it still lags behind traditional high street spending, said Lloyds. 
Britain’s biggest bank said that by value, 80% of its card spending is in store and 20% is online. It added that it was “no surprise” that Saturday remains the busiest day of the week for card usage in stores, with the tills ringing at peak volume between 11.30am and 4pm.
What may be more surprising is that Sunday is not actually the new Saturday. Volumes of transactions in retailers on a Sunday are high in the middle of the day but spending collapses after 3.30pm as stores are forced to shut. Friday stands out as the second most popular day for shoppers in store, with sales on a Friday afternoon significantly higher than any other afternoon of the week.
The Lloyds online shopping data ties in with figures from John Lewis, whose website is one of the biggest online retailers in the UK. It said that 8.30pm to 9.30pm on Sunday is the most popular time for placing orders, closely followed by 9to 10pm on a Monday.
It added that shoppers are now more likely to be using phones to go shopping than laptop or tablet computers, particularly during the morning rush hour. John Lewis said: “Mobile is the most popular device used to shop on johnlewis.com weekdays between 6am and 9am.” It added that orders placed via smartphones increased by 60% this year.
Online shoppers spend remarkably little time browsing web pages before spending. John Lewis said: “When shopping online, those who need things urgently typically take less than 6 minutes to make their purchase, whereas those who are looking for inspiration spend an average of 26 minutes browsing before purchasing.”
The TV chef Michel Roux Jr has said he will scrap the the service charge on all diners’ bills from the end of January after admitting his Michelin-starred Le Gavroche used the 13% additional fee as revenue rather than sharing it among staff.
The former Masterchef judge apologised earlier this week for paying chefs less than the legal minimum wage, as revealed in a Guardian investigation, and announced on Friday that Le Gavroche would mark on bills and menus that no further payment was needed, although customers could still leave a tip if they wished.
In an interview with the Caterer, Roux said he considered tipping and voluntary service charges to be different things, but confirmed he was scrapping the latter because he was “fed up with this ambiguity”. Instead he would raise the price of dishes – a fixed-price menu with wine currently costs £212 a person – by 13%.
“For me, tipping and service charge are two different things but by removing the service charge and incorporating it into the cost of the menu then it is clear, clean and unambiguous,” he said. “And then if diners wish to leave a tip on top of that it is up to them.
“I think this is something we should do in the restaurant industry. It is not clear for the customer whether or not they should leave extra on the table or whether or not it is going to all the staff or how it is being distributed. I daresay some restaurateurs have been abusing that,” Roux said.
Earlier this week, the chef said he was “embarrassed and sorry” after the Guardian revealed he was paying chefs as little as £5.50 an hour when they were working 68 hours a week.
Chefs angered at being paid below the legal minimum wage in his Mayfair restaurant said the situation was exacerbated by its decision not to share the service charge that many diners assume supplements staff wages.
At the time, a spokeswoman for the restaurant said: “All Le Gavroche staff, front of house and kitchen, share in the 13% discretionary service charge.”
But after further questioning, the restaurant made clear that no member of staff received any of the service charge over and above their basic wages. “Wages are not dependent on fluctuating levels of discretionary service charges or cash tips,” a spokeswoman said. “Gratuities form just one part of the payroll each month. Service charge is treated as revenue, and the restaurant pays all taxes accordingly.”
She said the original statement was trying to make clear that the waiters and chefs were treated equally in the matter of service charge, not that they received any of it in addition to their wages.
One chef who spoke to the Guardian about the issue said: “Roux was fully aware that to share the service charge is what the public expects. He was purporting to share the service charge, but he wasn’t. We don’t do this job for the money, but he makes out that he shares this money and he doesn’t.”
The government said earlier this year that it believed all discretionary payments for service, after tax where applicable, should be given to the worker. A government consultation on service charges and tipping, led by the former business secretary Sajid Javid, called for service charges on customers’ bills to be clear and voluntary and said it was considering prohibiting employers from taking any cut, to provide greater protection for workers. The consultation found 61% of diners believed staff should keep 100% of service charges.
It came after some of the country’s best-known restaurant chains, including Giraffe, Zizzi, Pizza Express, Strada and Ask Italian, were accused of keeping all or part of the service charges automatically added to bills, rather than passing them on to staff.
The British Hospitality Association, of which Le Gavroche is a member, has said restaurants should be legally required to tell customers how service charges and tips are distributed among staff.
Roux said he hoped other restaurants would follow Le Gavroche and incorporate the service charge into menu prices.
“Hopefully others will join me in making it clearer for the public to understand what they are paying for, and this move will also ensure there is complete transparency for our front of house and kitchen teams,” he said.
Householders face steep hikes in electricity bills next year, as EDF Energy said it would raise prices by 8.4% from March, with other “big six” energy providers expected to match the increases.
The French-owned energy giant, which in September signed an £18bn deal to build the controversial Hinkley Point nuclear plant, said it would cut gas prices by 5.2% but blamed rising costs for the increase in its electricity tariff.
Experts urged customers on standard tariffs to lock into cheap fixed-priced deals while they were still available.
The changes mean that dual fuel customers with EDF (taking both electricity and gas) will see their bills rise by 1.2%, to an average of £1,082 a year. Prepayment customers who take both gas and electricity from EDF will still pay 5.1% less after March, at £1,081 a year.
Wholesale energy prices have risen by around a third since last spring, and Mark Todd, co-founder of Energyhelpline, said EDF’s rise is likely to be “the first of many”. 
It is also the first major price rise since the collapse of GB Energy in November. The three-year-old gas and power supplier, which pulled in 160,000 customers with cheaper tariffs, blamed “swift and significant increases in energy prices” for its failure. Fears are now growing that other “challenger” providers could fail, and leave the big six in a stronger position to raise prices.
Todd is predicting average rises nearer to 5%. “We urge consumers to take this as proof that price rises are definitely coming and to use it as a catalyst to get off the horrible standard tariffs that make so many cold and penniless, and get onto a nice low-cost fixed rate that makes heating your home affordable,” he added.
EDF said that 1.5 million customers would be unaffected because they are locked into fixed-rate deals. It said it would write to those on standard variable tariffs and provide details of its best deals.
Beatrice Bigois, managing director of customers at EDF Energy, said: “Many industry commentators have said that prices charged by energy suppliers will rise after the winter. We are being open about the fact our electricity prices will go up after our price freeze. But we also know it is right to pass on to loyal customers the fall in gas costs that energy suppliers have seen over recent months.”
But critics said EDF was raising electricity prices when much of its power was already generated from nuclear plants. 
“EDF is in the unique position of owning all the UK’s nuclear power stations so they don’t actually need to buy any electricity. This means that they have been largely insulated from the turmoil in the wholesale markets that has seen 35% wholesale price rises since March and put GB Energy out of business. These wholesale rises are putting much more pressure on other suppliers to hike rates than EDF,” said Todd. 
EDF is first of the big six to announce that an increase in prices is in the pipeline. British Gas and SSE have both frozen the cost of their standard tariffs over the winter months.
Claire Osborne, energy expert at uSwitch, said: “It’s disappointing to see EDF already committing to price rises in March that will make them the most expensive variable tariff of the big six. Increasing the price of an already high energy bill could leave almost 2 million EDF standard variable customers buckling under the pressure, and it’s a bitter pill to swallow even if it is after the winter months – consumers still need to keep the lights on.
“With wholesale costs rising, putting further pressure on bills, we have already seen the cheapest deal rise by £126 in the past two months, and the danger is now that the other big six suppliers will follow suit with their own price hikes in the spring.”
However Guy Anker, managing editor of Moneysavingexpert, said the price rise was lower than expected given what is happening to wholesale prices.
“Nevertheless, no one should see this as good news and it should sound as a loud clarion call to any customer of any energy firm on a standard tariff to urgently check if they can save by locking into a cheap fix, as other firms are likely to follow.”
He added: “Urgent is the key word as the price of the cheapest deals has been rising, so the longer you wait the less you’ll save if that trend continues.”
A businessman who had everything – including his passport – stolen from a hire car on the last day of a Spanish holiday says he has been left with a £1,300 bill after his holiday insurance refused to pay most of the claim.
Paul Whyte and his 17-year-old son had all their bags snatched from the locked boot after stopping for lunch in Benidorm on the way back to the airport in August. Crucially, their passports were in their stolen bags, which meant they had to abandon their Jet2 flights home.
Instead, they had to stay an extra night, drive to the British Consulate in Alicante, book last-minute peak-time flights back to Newcastle, and hire a car to get home to Glasgow.
His travel insurance was bought from an award-winning company, Holidaysafe, but says he was bemused to discover how little he could claim for. He says the company has used its terms and conditions to refuse to pay for the consequential costs he had assumed would be covered.
Whyte, who is semi-retired but still works in property, says: “Everything was locked in the boot of our hire car out of sight, and it all went. The local tourist police told us the airline wouldn’t let us fly without our passports, even though we had checked in with those details.
“We had to get back to the villa that we’d already left, extend the car hire, go to the embassy and pay £200 for two emergency travel documents – and re-book expensive flights at a cost of £440 to get us back to the UK.”
He says his total losses were in excess of £3,000, but as his Holidaysafe multi-trip policy did not include electronic items, he accepted that his son’s DVD player and other similar items would not be covered. However, he says he was shocked when the claims firm appointed by the insurer, TCF, paid out just £851 for basic items stolen but refused to pay for passports and replacement flights.
“I specifically chose this policy as it had been recommended on the Martin Lewis MoneySavingExpert website as being the best value. I have been travelling for over 40 years and always take out insurance. TCF argues that our passport and tickets should be kept in locked trip accommodation, but I had already left my accommodation and was heading back to the airport.
“I thought leaving them in a locked car was safer than risking the pickpockets and motorbike thieves that operate in Benidorm,” he says.
Emails sent by the claims handler to Whyte state that passports are only covered if taken from a “safety deposit box or your locked holiday trip accommodation”.
“We cannot see that a Fiat Panda can be classified as trip accommodation in this instance,” he was told by staff as reason to deny him further payments.
Whyte claims that the firm’s stance does not chime with its “customer promise,” prominently set out on its website. This states: “We believe we have to provide the whole package, and that means that not only must the price be competitive, but the cover provided should be extensive, the policy terms and conditions reasonable and easily understood, the customer service should be first class and, most importantly, the claims process must be straightforward and fair, with prompt settlement.”
Holidaysafe was recently named as the Consumer Moneyfacts travel insurance provider of the year.
TCF told Guardian Money that the underwriter has now decided to add an extra £500 to the payout as a gesture of goodwill. It said: “The items that are contested by Mr Whyte are beyond the terms of his policy. They are regarded as ‘consequential losses’, which the majority of travel policies do not cover.
“The underwriters, however, will be trying to address this issue in 2017 by launching a new type of product that will cover these items. This is an industry-wide problem.”
A spokesman adds that consumers who buy from comparison sites should be aware that policies will often be categorised as “good value” for a reason. “The cover they get will not be as wide as they might assume due to pressure on premium prices within this competitive market. Travellers such as Mr Whyte should always understand what they are buying before they purchase a policy,” he says.
Whyte is just the latest of thousands of holidaymakers who found that their policy didn’t live up to the marketing hype. Last year there were 2,267 complaints to the Financial Ombudsman Service about declined claims.
FOS says it generally finds in favour of 48% of consumers following a dispute.
Six months ago I joined a small company as an area assistant. Two months after starting, my area manager was made redundant and I ended up with his workload as well as my own.
He was asked to leave because our company has been purchased by a multinational. The new boss of our company has been working with me for the past few months and I’ve been praised for my work many times.
However, my duties are obviously way beyond what I was hired to do and I have landed up with an incredible amount of responsibility. I am now doing exactly the same job as the “redundant” area manager but am still, on paper, an “assistant”.
My co-workers also seem to resent the fact I have a good relationship with the boss and I feel this gets in the way of my work. I suppose this is a hangover from the takeover, which caused a lot of worry and was unsettling for everyone.
I like my position and the upside is that I get to learn and be challenged more than before. However, not surprisingly, I want a pay rise. My boss seems reluctant to discuss this. I only mentioned it once, saying I expected a rise at some point, but that’s all.
What should I do? I can get another job for double the money (I am not exaggerating!) but I enjoy what I do.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
You can let the music play all night long in these properties, from Cumbria to Wrexham
Bank customers will be left vulnerable to fraudsters who trick them into transferring their money, the consumer body Which? has claimed, as it accused the payments regulator of letting banks off the hook.
Which? said the Payment Systems Regulator had not done enough to make banks responsible for reimbursing the tens of thousands of customers who have suffered losses as a result of fraudulent money transfers.
The consumer group was reacting to the work conducted by the PSR after a “super-complaint” the consumer group had made in September about the rise of fraud over the phone, internet and on mobile devices.
The PSR said banks could do more to identify potentially fraudulent payments but that it did not intend to make banks’ liable for losses from what are known as authorised push payments (APP). It intends to do further analysis on whether banks should be held responsible and shift the burden away from consumers.
Alex Neill, managing director of Which? home & legal services, said: “The regulator has finally acknowledged the considerable consumer harm caused by bank transfer scams. However, while recognising that the industry is not doing enough, it has failed to adequately address the issue of liability and has let the banks off the hook, giving them little incentive to do more to protect their customers.
“The outcome for people is unfortunately that they will continue to be scammed out of millions of pounds. We need to see swift action and not see this kicked into the long grass in the second half of 2017,” said Neill.
Which? made the super-complaint in September when it raised concerns that the sums consumers were being tricked into transferring were “often large and can be life-changing”. The consumer body had argued that placing more liability on banks for the losses from such scams would create efficient incentives for banks to develop systems to better manage risks.
The Guardian has highlighted a case of a couple losing £25,000 from fraudster who posed as their builder and set up a copycat email address.
The consumer body described how the scam worked in two ways, either by fraudulent access to a consumer account or where the customer is deceived into authorising payment to the scammer’s account. The payment is almost instant and can take place over the phone, via online banking, or in person.
In response, the PSR set out three possible ways to clamp down. These require banks to work on how they can share customer data to help money be reclaimed. There would also be a common approach to dealing with scams and collection of data to establish the extent of the fraud.
Hannah Nixon, managing director of the new regulatory body, acknowledged scamming was a growing problem. “Tens of thousands of people have, combined, lost hundreds of millions of pounds to these scams, but the data we have seen so far is incomplete. We need a concerted and coordinated industry-wide approach to better protect consumers, and we need it to start today,” she said.
While the PSR will not make banks liable for losses immediately, it said it would keep monitoring the situation. “As work progresses and additional evidence comes to light, we will consider whether it is appropriate to propose changes to the obligations or incentives that banks have for these types of scams,” the PSR said.
Nixon said that while Which? had called for banks to be made liable it was not that simple. Changes are already underway to the way payments are made with a “confirmation of payee” system being introduced so that a sort code and account number is typed in to transfer some money, an instant message appears to check that the recipient is the one intended.
“There is no silver bullet, but more can be done to prevent these scams in the first instance, and to respond faster when it does happen, in order to give consumers more support and help in recovering their money,” said Nixon.
The Financial Conduct Authority, which also looks after the interests of consumers, said it would work with firms to tackle concerns about the banks sending the payments and the banks which receive them. Christopher Woolard, executive director of strategy and competition, said: “Financial crime is a priority for the FCA and we will work to eliminate fraud by whatever means.”
 Its decline began before the last owner moved out in 1988 and all its period treasures have vanished inside. This could be good news for an energetic buyer because the council conservationists are happy to allow a contemporary refit provided the facade is restored. Permission has been granted for a two-bedroom eco-friendly design with an open-plan living area flowing round a circular enclosed dining room and circular bathroom upstairs. You are allowed to erect a glass-fronted, zinc-clad guest lodge with a decked terrace above the river, and landscape the steep garden into a series of terraces.
Also, how landlords’ buy-to-let profits could soon become losses, and a perfect pair of pumping stations
One of the reasons why relatively few people change energy supplier (Millions stuck on ‘rip-off’ energy tariffs, data reveals, 15 December) is that price comparison is made more difficult by the standing daily charge that the energy companies include in their bills. The government could help us all by making this illegal. Then there would be a single figure to compare: the charge for a unit of electricity or its equivalent for gas.
Paul Clifford
Kirtlington, Oxfordshire
• Your interviewer describes Glenda Jackson’s face as “crumpled like an old £5 note” (‘I’ve never got the fear thing’, G2, 15 December). Would he have used the same derogatory description had his 80-year-old subject been male? 
Mary-Ellen Brown
Cardiff
• If the news item quoted by Les Summers (Letters, 15 December) did say that more than half of all the jobs created by UK employers this year went to EU workers, this is hardly surprising. At the moment, every UK citizen who works here is an EU worker.
Mike Jones 
London
• Rod Edmond (Letters, 14 December) mentions a radio adaptation by Dylan Thomas of The Beach of Falesa by Robert Louis Stevenson and wonders if it was ever broadcast. In fact, an adaptation of Thomas’s screenplay of the story was first broadcast on BBC Radio 3 in 2014. Twice.
Alison Hindell
Head of audio drama, BBC
• Re your editorial (15 December) on Donald Trump’s cabinet nominees: not so much “draining the swamp” as filling it with alligators.
Ron Lancaster
Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Council tax will be allowed to rise faster than expected by about £46 a year for an average home to bail out struggling social care services for the elderly and vulnerable in England, Sajid Javid, the communities secretary, has said.
Under the plans, councils will be able to raise an extra 3% from their local population this year and 3% next year to fund social care, bringing forward planned increases of 2% a year.
A typical band D council tax bill of £1,530 this year would rise by £46 next year to fund social care, on top of a discretionary general increase of 2%.
Javid said there would also be a £240m “adult social care support grant” to help councils that are particularly struggling with care of older residents, which will take money from a scheme to incentivise housebuilding called the new homes bonus.
He said the money would add up to almost £900m for local authorities over the next two years and announced plans for a wider rethink of how to better integrate health and social care.
But the plan was immediately criticised by Labour and Liberal Democrats for being ineffective and regressive as a tax, while some Conservatives also raised concerns that the funding does not go far enough.
Jim McMahon, a shadow communities minister, could be heard saying “passing the buck” as Javid said councils would need to “justify” social care precept rises to their taxpayers.
Clive Efford, another Labour MP, told Javid the plans were not good enough. “We’ve got a great big gaping hole and the secretary of state comes here with a sticking plaster,” he said.
Norman Lamb, the Lib Dem former health minister, said it was a “truly feeble response to a national crisis”, arguing it was an unfair way to raise money that would increase inequalities.
Two Conservative MPs – Jo Churchill and Sarah Wollaston, the chair of the Commons health committee – called on the government to come up with a longer-term solution to the problems with adult social care, which are putting pressure on NHS bed capacity.
It was met with disappointment by local councils, who believe they need more help from central government to solve the long-term crisis in social care. Nick Forbes, the leader of Newcastle council and Labour lead on the Local Government Association, said it was a “huge missed opportunity” and the government had “just kicked the can down the road a bit”.
Medical organisations warned that it could lead to the NHS becoming “paralysed” this winter. One of the NHS’s top doctors warned that what he called an inadequate response to the “national crisis” of social care threatened to “tip the NHS over the edge this winter”.
Dr Mark Holland, the president of the Society for Acute Medicine, said that simply raising the council tax precept for social care was “too little too late”, given the scale of the problem.
He said: “Regardless of today’s announcement, the current scale of the problem is enough to tip the NHS over the edge this winter. This is too little, too late. The government has decimated the social care funding and demonstrated its disregard for the situation and its impact on the NHS by failing to acknowledge it in the recent autumn statement. If we arrive in January with the NHS in England paralysed, is there a plan B?
“The prime minister must acknowledge that social care is now a national crisis. It is in a critical condition and won’t be cured with half measures. Short-term plans will struggle to fix the problem now and won’t be enough to fix the problem in the future.”
The British Red Cross said woefully inadequate social care was now “a humanitarian crisis” because of its dire human consequences. Mike Adamson, its chief executive, said: “We see people affected by this social care crisis every day – people sent home from hospital without clothes, falling and not being found for days, not being washed because there is no carer to help them. This is a humanitarian crisis that needs urgent action.
“We are pleased the government has recognised something needs to be done. However, this is not an adequate solution. This will also not plug the existing funding gap, let alone allow councils to work towards a sustainable health and social care system and invest in prevention. If more people are helped before their problems become crises, this would alleviate some of the pressures on our social care services. We stand ready to work with government to find a much-needed long-term solution.” 
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
UK 4G coverage worse than in Romania and Peru, watchdog finds
House prices to rise 2% in 2017, says Rightmove
UK ‘failing to keep up with online consumer fraud’
Venting our anger on Yodel’s approach to parcel delivery
Great Western Railway is going off the rails with refunds
Buy-to-let landlords face a set of changes in 2017 that could cut into their profits. One told Guardian Money how he feels that he and other investors are being “vilified”. 
If you’re planning to send money overseas for Christmas get competitive exchange rates and free online currency transfers from Moneycorp, provider of the Guardian money transfer service.
Get 21 days of winter sports cover as standard with the Guardian’s annual travel insurance, provided by Voyager.
Fewer people are expected to buy homes in 2017, as tax changes and economic uncertainty resulting from the Brexit decision deter owner-occupiers and landlords.
The Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) said it expected the number of transactions to fall to 1.17m, the lowest level since 2013. The figure is below the 1.26m it forecast a year ago, which the CML said was “partly relating to the economic uncertainty from the EU referendum, but also because of tax and regulatory changes in the housing and mortgage market”.
In April, a higher rate of stamp duty on second homes was introduced, increasing the upfront cost of buying investment property.
Changes to the rules around landlords’ tax relief will start to be phased in from April 2017, and those buyers will also face tougher checks before they are given a mortgage.
The CML’s forecast for 2016 anticipated 1.25m transactions and £237bn worth of mortgage advances; with the end of the year in sight there look set to be slightly fewer sales, at 1.23m, but more lending, at £246bn.
The number of homes repossessed by lenders also seems set to come in lower than the forecast, at 7,900 rather than 18,000.
The CML said the housing market was “in a similar position to the economy, slightly subdued but holding up better than expected only a few months ago”.
Although data since the referendum showed the economy had performed better than was expected before June’s referendum, prospects were likely to remain more uncertain than usual for the next few years as a consequence of the Brexit vote, the CML said.
It said the UK would go through an adjustment period, and inflation and unemployment were both expected to rise.
Housing transactions were distorted by the stamp duty change in the spring, which caused many purchases to be brought forward, but the CML said the underlying trend had also softened and activity was subdued.
Paul Smee, director-general of the CML, said: “The housing market is relatively well insulated from direct Brexit effects as most activity is driven domestically, but it is not immune from more generalised economic uncertainty. 
“And we expect any modest strengthening in homeowner lending to be offset by a less active house purchase market in buy-to-let, as both tax and regulatory changes bite on landlords.”
Simon Checkley, managing director of broker Private Finance, said: “Aside from the surge in buy to let we saw earlier in the year as landlords clambered to beat the Stamp Duty deadline, lending figures have showed little movement each month.
“I don’t expect we’ll see much in the way of change over the next 12 months compared with 2016. Indeed, we are likely to see inflation rise further in 2017, which will impact on consumers, so lending might be flat at best.”
I have a severely autistic six-year-old who got hold of the TV remote and bought £734 of kids’ programmes on my BT account. BT refuses to waive the charges, although I have never purchased any programme during my five years as a customer. It has given me two weeks to pay but, as a single parent, I can’t afford this. HT, Mirfield, W Yorks
You say your child managed to order 40 programmes in 10 minutes, so it’s disappointing that BT didn’t flag up unusual usage in the same way that banks do. It has now agreed to cancel the charges as a goodwill gesture.
You now need to ensure that future payments via the remote are protected by the pin you chose when you first subscribed so this can’t happen again.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
Q I have a genuine problem which is causing a problem in my marriage. I married my wife over 20 years ago. When we met, she already had three children by a previous marriage, and we had one more together.
I have always treated them all the same, and my current will leaves everything to my wife, or in the event of her death, a straight four-way split between the kids. I have no intention, or plan, to revise this, my wife’s will is a mirror-image.
Over the last few years my wife has become concerned that if she pre-deceases me, I may subsequently remarry ‘some old scrubber’ and if I subsequently die, the joint estate would pass into the hands of such a woman, to the detriment of our children.
We have had several ‘rows’ about it, and divorce is now being mentioned in order to prevent me leaving the kids’ inheritance to this non-existent woman.
As I really don’t want to have to get divorced in order to prevent me doing something that I actually have no intention of doing I was wondering is there any sort of legal device whereby my wife can change her will to prevent her hard-earned money going to some ‘gold-digging slut’, that would not involve me being left homeless after her death? I am hoping you may be able to suggest something.
AN
A Your wife has reason to be concerned. But not because you are likely to fall for and marry someone unsuitable after her death. The possible cause for concern would be that if you did remarry, the remarriage would automatically revoke your current will. This would mean that if you died after remarrying without making a new will – or without making a new will ‘in anticipation of’ your next marriage (ie before you did the deed) – what your child and step-children would get would be decided by the rules of intestacy rather than by you.
Since the new rules introduced in England & Wales in October 2014, if you die leaving a wife, husband, civil partner and a child or children, the married or civil partner gets the lot if your estate is worth £250,000 or less. If your estate is worth more than that, the surviving wife, husband or civil partner gets £250,000, all personal possessions plus half the remaining estate, while any children (including adopted children) get whatever is leftover split between them. Another thing that may worry both you and your wife is that the term ‘children’ under the rules, does not include step-children unless legally adopted. (The rules are different in Scotland and Northern Ireland, and you can find out exactly who would get what if you live in England or Wales)
You may be relieved to hear that divorce isn’t the answer either because the same scenario as above would apply if you remarried after divorce rather than death and failed to make a new will in your children’s favour.
But you are right in thinking that your wife could guard against your children missing out on what you would like them to inherit by making a new will. For example, she could leave her half of the house plus whatever else to your children while giving you the right to live in the property until your death. You could do the same with your will. Whatever you do, it should be to seek expert legal advice as this is a complicated area – especially where step-children are involved.
The UK is failing to keep up with online fraud, and systems to protect shoppers from scams do not yet provide value for money, the National Audit Office has warned.
The NAO estimated that consumers lost at least £14.8bn last year, of which £4.2bn is thought to be hidden and unreported losses from crime such as mass marketing fraud and counterfeit goods.
Consumer protection cost around £165m during the year, with local Trading Standards services receiving about £124m and Citizens Advice £18m, the NAO calculated.
But it said the system as a whole “has not yet demonstrated that it provides value for money in protecting consumers from modern scams, unfair trading, and unsafe goods”.
National Trading Standards, which was set up in 2012 following a previous NAO report, had made an impact on consumer protection, preventing £345m worth of losses since April 2014.
But the NAO said funding for this remained small compared with the size of the problem.
It warned that the system was not keeping pace with the growth in online consumer fraud within the UK’s e-commerce market – now the third largest globally.
Local Trading Standards teams have lost 56% of full-time equivalent staff since 2009, with 20 services in England suffering funding cuts of more than 60% since 2011 and some offices left with just one qualified officer.
But despite this, the teams were expected to enforce 263 different pieces of legislation “with little direction from government on the priority of these”.
The NAO found that although changes to commerce meant more consumer issues were happening at national and international levels, just 7% of local Trading Standards teams based their priorities nationally.
It noted that the Competition and Markets Authority was also having a good impact, generating at least £74m of direct financial benefits to consumers each year at a cost of £6m.
The head of the NAO, Amyas Morse, said: “Progress has been made since our 2011 report and consumer protection bodies have shown they can make good impacts with limited resources.
“As the threats consumers face become increasingly wide-ranging, however, the system has not kept pace with the changes, leaving consumers inadequately protected in a number of areas.
“While the improvements are welcome, the system as a whole has not yet shown it provides value for money.”
Leon Livermore, chief executive of the Chartered Trading Standards Institute, said: “The amount spent on trading standards has fallen from £213m in 2011 to £125m today, so it’s not surprising the system is struggling to cope. 
“It has left consumers inadequately protected and has helped to set the conditions for issues like the horsemeat and hoverboards scandals and the ongoing problems with Whirlpool and VW. 
“However, the report does recognise the benefits of enhanced coordination and in particular the work of the Consumer Protection Partnership and National Trading Standards, which has shown that trading standards can have a significant impact on a regional and national scale. We stand ready to support the government and work with our partners to implement the recommendations in the report.”
Which? director of campaigns and communications, Vickie Sheriff, said: “The NAO paints a worrying picture of a system struggling to deal with the scale of problems that consumers now face. 
“With consumer losses of around £14.8bn annually, it cannot be right that some Trading Standards services have suffered dramatic cuts leaving people so poorly protected against scams and other threats. 
“The government must take action urgently to ensure that a sustainable and robust system is in place to protect consumers.” 
A government spokeswoman said: “This NAO report recognises the significant progress made since 2011 but highlights where more needs to be done.
“We will carefully consider the NAO’s findings as part of our ongoing work to examine the consumer protection regime and will publish a green paper in spring 2017.”
Letters: There is little point in governments kick-starting an economy, just to crash it again within a decade
In his comparison between 1936 and 2016 (A view from 1936: what Keynes would say now, 12 December), Larry Elliott omits to mention one of the major differences, and one that JM Keynes would surely have noticed as he speculated on its implications – namely the enormous increase in the productive power of labour and of the economy.
Our priority should be to help people reduce their working hours (whether over a lifetime or weekly or daily) so that they can enjoy the leisure their productive capacity allows; today most people are still wage slaves, indeed more so than ever in the richest countries.
Part of the issue is how we can enable this to take place in a way that is fair. At present, some cannot find any well-paying work, while others are overburdened with it. Technological change means that the goods and services demanded and available change over time, so that the more productive economy of today is producing different products from those of 1936, and consumers seek what is available today, but it remains true that without leisure we cannot enjoy the fruits of our labour.
Leisure is not about lying around doing nothing but eating and drinking: a distinction between fruitful activity and work or labour undertaken to earn enough to live on is fundamental to this debate.
How to achieve this end is by no means clear or easy, and certainly deserves debate and discussion, but it is disappointing that Larry Elliott is only concerned to use Keynes’s insights to allow even more people to be tied to the work economy, rather than liberated from it. This reminds us also that part of the debate needs to be about making the products and methods of production environmentally sustainable.
Roger Gibbs
Loughton, Essex
• With another 100 years tucked inside his sarcophagus, Keynes might observe that we don’t do moderation very well. There is little point in governments kickstarting an economy, just to crash it again within a decade. While growth provides the momentum that keeps an economy going, it is the rate of growth that sustains democratic government. The economy is like a bottle of whisky; sipped daily the pleasure can last a long while; knock it back in half a hour and you’ll get a hangover. We seem to insist in growing the economy at a rate way beyond sustainability. The richer elements of society seem determined to drive the economy to maximise their individual gains, intending to hang on to those gains, while the less successful are expected to repay all accumulated debt when the economy tanks. 
Martin London 
Henllan, Denbighshire
• Judging by Larry Elliott’s account, a thawed-out Keynes would still target growth as the solution to our current economic problems. So, apparently, he would not yet have noticed the finite nature of our planet, nor accepted the need for environmental sustainability that this imposes. Actually, there are hints in his 1930 essay Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren that he may well have been a quicker learner than this. So perhaps it’s Larry who is not keeping up.
Richard Middleton
Crossmichael, Dumfries and Galloway
• Keynes’s prediction in the 1930s was that as countries became wealthier, they would take this greater prosperity in the form of greater leisure rather than higher and higher incomes. Alas, this has not happened. Western society has been obsessed with earning more and more money, often through longer hours, rather than what we now call quality of life.
Michael Franklin
London
• Patrick Collinson is right in his observation that behind the “lost decade of wage growth” there is a far worse situation (Oh for the 1960s! Take home less but buy more, Money, 10 December). The mismatch between the official figures and the apparent fall in living standards is explained by the omission from official inflation figures of house prices. Since 1963 house prices have inflated a total of about 5,000% while the official inflation figure is only 1,800%. Housing is such a high proportion of living costs that this is a very serious distortion indeed.
Exactly why property prices are excluded is not clear, but the problem created goes far beyond hiding the truth of people getting poorer, bad enough as this is. The illusion has been created that higher house prices represent an increase in real national wealth, rather than the truth of money losing its purchasing power by the inverse of the increased price.
This illusion permeates the banking industry and even the government’s management of the economy, with potentially disastrous results, some of which we have already seen. For example, it can be seen as the underlying cause of the 2008 banking crisis, with the banks lending into an illusory economy, far beyond what the real economy could afford.
Christopher Padley
Lincoln
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
The housing market slowed down in October, with the number of mortgages granted to home movers down 20% on a year ago, according to data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders.
There was also a fall in the buy-to-let market, where activity has been hit by tax changes. But the lending market was bolstered by the amount of remortgage activity which hit its highest level since January 2009.
The data was seized upon as evidence that the EU referendum in June had dented confidence and a sign that home owners were responding to the Bank of England’s rate cut to 0.25% after the vote for Brexit.
The CML said the amount borrowers were paying as a percentage of their household income to service repayments fell to a record low for both first-time buyers and home movers at 17.6%.
Paul Smee, its director general, said that while buy-to-let lending was weak, the remortgage market was strong. “This appears to be linked to borrowers taking advantage of the repricing of mortgages following the base rate cut,” he said.
About 28,900 loans were granted to home movers in October, a 20% decrease on a year ago and 8% down month on month. Home movers borrowed £5.9bn, down 9% on a the previous month and 18% on a year ago.
The figures followed last month’s warning from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors that number of properties on the market fell in October while the number of buyers rose.
Remortgage activity totalled £6.1bn, up 11% on September and 7% on a year ago. There was also a rise in the number of loans to 34,700, up 10% month on month and 5% on a year ago.
Andy Knee, the chief executive of legal services provider LMS, said: “October was a strong month for the remortgage market, with activity hitting an eight-year high, while the rest of the market stood still. The ramifications of June’s referendum result are hitting home.
“Homeowners are taking advantage of low rates to secure reduced monthly repayments.”
Activity in the buy-to-let market – which is being monitored by the Bank of England – has been slowing as a result of the 3% stamp duty surcharge on second properties introduced in April.
Lending increased 7% month on month to £3bn, but remains 21% lower year on year. Nearly two-thirds of buy-to-let loans were remortgages rather than for house purchases.
The maximum compensation someone can receive if an investment company goes bust could be increased from its current £50,000 to as much as £1m, the UK’s main financial watchdog has suggested.
The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) said a rethink of the official compensation scheme relating to financial firms may be needed following the new freedoms on pensions introduced in 2015.
These have seen many older people turn their backs on annuities – products that provide a retirement income for life – in favour of investment products such as income drawdown.
Currently, if an annuity firm fails the saver will receive compensation of 100% of their loss however much it is, but protection on income drawdown is capped at £50,000.
But the FCA also warned that higher protection limits could increase the risk of the scheme’s costs becoming “unsustainable,” and might also encourage consumers and firms to take greater risks with their and other people’s money.
The regulator has unveiled a wide-ranging review of the way the financial services compensation scheme (FSCS) works, and has set out a number of ideas for changing the way it is funded and the protection it offers.
The FSCS is the official safety net for customers of banks, insurers, fund managers and other financial firms that go out of business, and has paid out more than £26bn to more than 4.5 million consumers since it was set up in 2001. In 2015-16 it paid out £271m in compensation.
At the moment the maximum FSCS compensation relating to investments is £50,000 per person per firm, but in a case where someone had an annuity, the FSCS limit for long-term insurance would apply, which means they would be virtually guaranteed to get all their money back if the company providing it was to fail.
During the period July 2015 to March 2016, annuities accounted for less than 14% of the total number of pension pots that people accessed for the first time in order to take an income or withdraw the money. Instead, many more people have been investing their pension cash in drawdown products, which allow them to take out regular amounts of money while the majority of their savings remain invested.
The FCA said it was seeking views on various possible options to deal with this, ranging from doing nothing to lifting the £50,000 limit to £75,000, £100,000, £150,000 or even £1m.
It added that FSCS data on pension plans for the period 2010 to 2014 showed there were only six claims out of a total of 52,000 that exceeded £1m. “Therefore, a £1m limit would have provided virtually 100% protection in that period,” stated the report.
It added: “With only the lower compensation limit in place, pensioners could potentially be placed in financial difficulty with little or no chance to replenish their savings. At the same time, any increase in the limits implies a potential increase in levies.”
A consultation is already taking place on plans to increase the maximum FSCS compensation for people with money in savings accounts from £75,000 to £85,000 from 30 January 2017.
Ofgem has published its first energy company league table, comparing the most expensive standard tariffs with the cheapest deals on the market to provide “greater transparency to consumers”.
The energy secretary, Greg Clark, said the table would show consumers where they could save money and would increase transparency for the “millions” of Britons who were overpaying for their gas and electricity by remaining on the expensive standard variable tariffs.
The table will compare the average energy bill paid by a household on a standard variable tariff from the larger energy companies with deals from the 10 cheapest suppliers. Consumers can typically save £200 a year; this figure could be as much as £260 for those with the supplier Extra Energy.
The energy regulator said last month that 66% of all households remained on expensive standard variable tariffs.
The government is also launching a call for evidence on allowing customers access to accurate electronic data on how much energy they use to enable them to share it securely with price comparison websites in return for individual quotes.
The Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) warned in June that 70% of people were on the more expensive “default” standard variable tariff, costing consumers £1.4 bn more than a competitive market.
Clark said: “Millions of people across Britain continue to pay too much for their energy. The measures announced today are a positive step to help more people benefit from increased choice and competition. 
“As the government has made clear, where markets are not working for consumers – in energy or otherwise – we are prepared to act.”
The Citizens Advice chief executive, Gillian Guy, said: “This league table will lift the lid on the price difference between standard tariffs and cheaper deals, helping those customers who are currently paying over the odds for their gas and electricity identify a better rate. 
“We’d also like to see energy companies do more off their own back to help customers who are on a low income, like moving them to a cheaper deal.”
Mark Todd, the co-founder of energyhelpline.com, said the energy price league table would expose just how expensive standard energy tariffs were and how much customers could save by switching.
“We hope this publication acts as a clarion call for consumers to ditch these horrible tariffs this Christmas. Standard energy tariffs offer almost no protection against price rises as well as very high prices.
“They are the worst of all worlds. Around two thirds of the population, about 40 million people, are blighted by their scourge and so considerably poorer as a result. The basic rule is: never be on a standard variable energy tariff – they are a rip-off,” he said.
Energy UK figures released on Wednesday showed more than 4 million customers switched electricity supplier this year, “eclipsing” the past three years, while more than 400,000 switched last month – the highest figure since November 2013. 
Lawrence Slade, the chief executive of the industry body Energy UK, said: “A record number of people have switched electricity supplier in 2016. This is fantastic progress, but more needs to be done.
“Over 40 companies across the industry, big and small, are working hard to win customers. I’d encourage everyone to look at the best deal for them, whether that is one that offers a lower price or better customer service, there are choices for everyone.”
Employment and unemployment down marginally. Wage growth and inactivity up a bit. Cut through the mass of data and the conclusion is clear: the improvement in the UK labour market has stalled.
The latest news from the Office for National Statistics is consistent with the recent reports from the Bank of England’s regional agents, the officials who act as the eyes and ears of Threadneedle Street’s monetary policy committee.
These regular updates suggest that companies have become a lot more cautious about hiring since the UK voted to leave the EU in June. The fall in employment of 6,000 during the three months to October followed an increase of 173,000 in the quarter ending in July. That is a marked deceleration and has been particularly pronounced in the private sector.
For the moment, the figures chime with business surveys and suggest that employers are adopting a wait-and-see approach, rather than resorting to major layoff programmes. The more timely but less comprehensive claimant count measure of unemployment showed a small rise of 2,400 in November, but this was lower than the market consensus of 6,500. There were as many job vacancies in the three months to November as in the three months leading up to the Brexit vote.
The most encouraging piece of news was the pickup in regular annual pay growth from 2.4% to 2.6%, because this will help blunt the impact of rising inflation caused by the higher oil price and the declining value of the pound.
It is probable, however, that prices will rise more quickly than wages in the months to come. This was a distinctly soft labour market report. The days of rapid jobs growth are over for now and that means it will become harder for workers to get more for their labour.
Stuck in a mobile notspot? Can’t watch YouTube on the bus? Twitter dead on your canal trip? The National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) feels your pain. You might not have heard of the NIC – unsurprising, since it was only set up in October 2015, by a long-forgotten politician called George Osborne.
But the NIC is an independent, non-governmental body which is overseeing £100bn of infrastructure spending. The members of the NIC are not to be sneezed at; they include former transport secretary Lord Adonis, former deputy prime minister Lord Heseltine, and Demis Hassabis, the founder of the British artificial intelligence company DeepMind, which was snapped up by Google for £400m.
Having already looked at smart power, Crossrail 2, and the high speed north rail scheme, the NIC has now looked at the UK’s prospects for 5G mobile networks.
What – 5G? Most of us still noodle along on 3G mobile data, for which the carriers spent £22.5bn in a bandwidth auction in 2000. 4G is much faster, and followed in 2014 (after raising only £2.3bn in its bandwidth auction). But 4G is also far less prevalent: the typical user can only access 4G 53% of the time, whereas 3G is available nearly everywhere.
The NIC is very upset about our performance in 4G: “Britain is 54th in the world for 4G. There are too many digital deserts and partial notspots, even within our city centres.” Being 54th means our 4G networks are behind Romania, Albania, Panama and Peru. Sad face emoji.
The NIC report is wonderfully buzzword-compliant: 5G, it explains, “means seamless connectivity. Ultra-fast, ultra-reliable, ultra-high capacity transmitting at super-low latency.” You can almost imagine the advert: breezy music playing while a happy young couple runs down the beach in slow motion as they upload holiday videos.
That’s not enough for the NIC. It notes that “mobile connectivity has become a necessity. The market has driven great advances since the advent of the mobile phone, but government must now play an active role to ensure that basic services are available wherever we live, work and travel, and our roads, railways and city centres must be made 5G-ready as quickly as possible.”
It sees a future of self-driving vehicles, and lots of people on trains who are using the internet to its full capacity (videoconferencing work while they’re delayed by strikes, perhaps). The NIC says that by 2025, the UK should be “5G-ready”: “the railway network must improve connectivity with a trackside network” – estimated cost £550m – and major roads must have “mobile networks fit for the future” at a cost of £380m. It’s fun to observe that giving rail passengers better connectivity takes away one of the key claimed benefits of HS2 – the necessity of getting businesspeople to the ends of the line faster.
Certainly it makes sense to improve connectivity around the rail and road networks. The key question is, will government do this better than mobile carriers?
So far, the mobile market in the UK has done things very effectively. I’ve frequently been critical of the way that the UK’s fixed-line infrastructure – essentially, BT’s Openreach network – has failed rural internet users. But when it comes to mobile, we’re flying: Ofcom’s data shows that in 2014 and 2015 the UK was first and second in terms of pricing for mobile services, ahead of Italy, France, Germany, Spain and especially the US.
The NIC says we’re doing badly in 4G. But I’d say we’re doing OK. The UK’s 4G auction was ridiculously delayed by arguments over the allocation available to EE (now owned by BT). Even so, in just under three years, we’ve gone from 0% to 53% availability.
What about these rivals who are outgunning us? Peru had a year’s head start on us in building 4G networks, and is home to both the fastest and slowest mobile speeds in South America, according to OpenSignal. Romania has been doing 4G since 2012, so it should beat us. Panama only began in March 2015; but it’s a much smaller country. And Albania began in July 2015, but it’s a small country too: only 3 million people, with five competing networks.
As the NIC points out, you need the government to step in where markets would fail. Covering all our roads and railways won’t happen commercially. The costs are relatively low, and the new chancellor could view it as a desirable infrastructure boost for the economy. We might finally end up with a proper internet infrastructure. All we need after that is to act on the NIC suggestion of having someone at cabinet level equivalent to the secretary of state for transport. Who will be the first secretary of state for the internet?
A charity that provides young black and ethnic minority people with paid training opportunities in creative and media companies, including the BBC and ITV, is facing closure after the government withdrew more than £2m of funding for the scheme.
The programme by diversity charity Creative Access was funded by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (Bis) until June this year, when responsibility for the apprenticeship and internship agenda was moved into the Department for Education under Theresa May’s new government.
Bis provided approximately 30% of the charity’s funding, including about £300,000 a year for staff overheads at Creative Access and a further £1.8m for grants to cover up to 40% of the cost of employing an intern. But despite earlier assurances that funding would continue, Creative Access was last week informed the DfE would no longer continue to fund its work because it was focusing on apprenticeships.
The news came days after it emerged that the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, blocked the appointment of the former deputy chief executive of Arts Council England, Althea Efunshile, a black woman, to the board of Channel 4, prompting further criticism of the government’s commitment to diversity.
Creative Access chief executive Josie Dobrin said the decision to scrap the charity’s funding was “a sad reflection of government priorities”.
“Obviously we’re very upset because we’re not entirely sure what the future holds for us,” Dobrin said. “There is a need for the wider apprenticeship agenda, and I do support that, but the creative industries is one of Britain’s biggest exports, and there’s a real economic need for it to thrive and represent audiences, it’s not just about philanthropy. 
“How can you create an advertising campaign, put on a play in a theatre, create news content, if the people that are creating all that content are from the same background? You need to be able to represent all your audiences. Over 40% of London and over 25% of all under-25 year olds are from a BME background. It’s not about putting people front of screen or front of stage, it’s about driving the creative economy.”
Founded in 2012 by Dobrin and talent agent Michael Foster, Creative Access has placed 700 interns across television, films, publishing, PR and media, including newspapers such as the Sun, the Financial Times and the Daily Mail. It contributes up to half the cost of the wages of each internship and recruits through student unions, university career services and job centres.
“We’ve acted as a catalyst for change within the creative industries over the last few years, and there have been initiatives which have sprung from this,” Dobrin said. “But there’s still a lot of work to be done. The government is really missing a trick if they jump ship now.”
Foster, who has represented a host of celebrities including Chris Evans, Sacha Baron Cohen and Billie Piper, was inspired to found the charity by the experience of his own company, The Rights House. When the literary agency advertised eight internships, it had 300 people applying, but not one of them was black or Asian as far as he could tell.
He told Broadcast that the charity was at risk of closure because it was carrying a £635,000 debt after continuing to run the scheme in anticipation of government funding.
In a letter to the minister for apprenticeships and skills, Robert Halfon, Foster said he believed the decision would have “a serious, unfair, and disproportionate effect on the ability of Bame young people, both graduates and apprenticeships, to gain employment in media”, and questioned whether pulling the funding contravened the Equality Act 2010.
Foster is yet to hear back from Halfon, but the response from supporters has been “completely overwhelming,” Dobrin said. A former intern has since started a petition calling on the prime minister to save the charity.
“For so many people, we’ve given them a foot into the creative industries which they wouldn’t have got otherwise,” she said. 
“One of the main ways of recruiting historically has been through word of mouth, and it doesn’t help that 85% of the creative industries are small to medium businesses. Second of all, there is a history of people recruiting in their own image. By that I mean, if you’re a middle class white male, you’re more likely to recruit somebody else like you. Plus, the fact that you have to be able to do unpaid internships, move to London, and significantly, the lack of role models, puts a lot of young people off. It can be quite intimidating to walk into an office where the whole room looks completely different to you.”
More than 70% of the young people Creative Access works with are eligible for free school meals or are first generation university students, Dobrin said. 
“All they need is to be given a platform where they can prove on a meritocratic basis that they’re good,” she said. “We don’t offer jobs, we offer internships, and only the people that are the best will get jobs at the end of it. As it happens, over 90% of the young people we work with go on to get full time work at the end of their internships.”
In the future, Creative Access is looking at different options and is hopeful that the creative industries will lend its support, Dobrin said.
A DfE spokesperson said: “Government money should be allocated on a fair and competitive basis, offering the best value for money for the taxpayer. While Creative Access is doing important work, we need to ensure that funding is focused on making the most difference to the people who need support.
“That’s why we have committed to increasing the proportion of black and ethnic minority apprenticeship starts by 20% by 2020. We’re giving extra money to employers who take on 16-18 year olds, care leavers and apprentices with disabilities and we’ve established National Colleges for Creative and Cultural Industries and Digital Skills.
“We are determined to build an apprenticeships and skills nation by transforming technical education, creating millions of quality apprenticeships, meeting the needs of our economy and helping those from disadvantaged backgrounds get on to the ladder of opportunity.”
On Monday, a diversity report by the Arts Council found that while the proportion of BME people in the arts and museum workforce was going up – 17% of the workforce in England’s 663 national portfolio organisations is BME compared with 15% of the population as a whole – BME staff were still underrepresented in top jobs. Ten percent of artistic directors, 8% of chief executives, and 9% of chairs of boards are black or minority ethnic.
The report followed a separate theatre diversity report commissioned by Andrew Lloyd Webber which warned that theatre risked being sidelined unless it better tackled the diversity issue.
Yes, it’s Suffolk and no, Suffolk is not renowned for mountain slopes or reliable snow cover. However, this 18th-century cottage will be close to Europe’s largest indoor ski slope if plans for the Snoasis snow dome go ahead. The idea is to have 258 miles of slope with a drop of 100m ready for 2020. A former smithy and shop in the grounds could be converted into extra living space if the four bedrooms cramp your style. There are gardens front and back, and exposed beams and brickwork within. Offers over £399,999. David Burr , 01359 245245
A flight I was due to go on from Manchester to Hamburg in June was cancelled as I was going through security. EasyJet took five of us to a hotel in Leven in Flintshire for a flight from Edinburgh to Hamburg the next day.
The following morning the taxi easyJet had promised did not turn up. I paid £60 for a replacement for the five of us and we arrived at the airport just before the check-in desk was due to close – only to be told that easyJet had overbooked the flight and two of us had to stay behind.
EasyJet then offered guaranteed seats on the first flight from Gatwick the next day and flew me and a stranded German doctor from Edinburgh to London for another overnight stay. The next day I had to pay for a taxi to Gatwick because the check-in time was too early for the hotel’s courtesy bus. At the airport we discovered that our flight had again been cancelled and no alternatives were available that day.
At our own expense we took a train to St Pancras and then the Eurostar to Cologne, where the German doctor hired a car and drove us to our destinations. On my return home, I claimed a refund of my expenses, which amounted to around £170 excluding my original air fare.
In September, easyJet finally emailed me saying that my fare had been refunded (which it was) and that a cheque for £167.98 would be posted. A month later, when the money had not arrived, easyJet then said that a reduced amount of £97.98 would be sent, with no explanation. Now I’ve been told it won’t reimburse the taxi fares because the receipts are “dated after the disruption date”. I pointed out the dates are between the original cancelled flight and the final abortive attempt to fly us out of Gatwick.
The German doctor, who travelled with me, has also been refused a refund of his expenses, including the Eurostar ticket and car hire. NS, Bristol
In my many years as a consumer columnist I’ve never come across a journey as botched as this one.
EasyJet tells me your first flight from Manchester was cancelled due to an air traffic control strike in France that caused mayhem across Europe. It’s extraordinary that at no point were you given that explanation.
As a knock-on from the strike, it says, ensuing flights were extra busy, which is why your alternative departure from Scotland was overbooked. Then, on your final attempt, the departure was cancelled due to crew sickness.
“While we have standby crew, the disruption caused by the French strike meant we were unable to cover this flight,” it says. “Air traffic control strikes rose to unprecedented levels this year which affected all airlines.”
It’s debatable whether the strike, common among air traffic controllers, would count as an “extraordinary circumstance” under EU rules on compensation payouts. This would exempt easyJet from having to pay compensation for the first cancellation, and the other two affected flights would not be eligible because you were effectively booked on them for free.
However, five months on, and only after we intervene, the airline admits that your experience was “extremely unfortunate” and decides to pay the statutory sum for denied boarding plus £100 goodwill. It also promises to reimburse your expenses.
Rejoicing would be premature, however. The cheque that finally arrives falls £70 short of the promised £283.70 and you are told your expenses claim is being “assessed”. Back to the press office, which promises all will be well. One day.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
HSBC has revealed that it is shutting more than four branches a week and that at least 57 more will be axed in the first few weeks of 2017. High-street banks have closed more than 1,000 branches in the UK during the past two years, according to consumer body Which?.
It has called on banks to consult with communities before implementing closures to ensure that the needs of their customers are being met. The organisation said its research had found that 1,046 bank branches were shut, or due to shut, between January 2015 and January 2017. It added that HSBC had axed the most branches over this period: a total of 321, representing a quarter of its network. HSBC told the Guardian it had closed 222 in 2016 alone, taking its current tally to 755.
The second largest number of closures, according to Which?, was at the Royal Bank of Scotland group, which has closed 191 outlets, followed by Lloyds Banking Group – which includes the Lloyds, Halifax and Bank of Scotland brands – with 180 branch closures, Barclays with 132, the Co-operative Bank (117, 53% of its entire network), Santander (87) and TSB (18).
The British Bankers’ Association reported earlier this year that the average high street bank branch dealt with only 71 customer visits a day - a 32% decline since 2011 - as consumers switched to online methods of managing money. However, the Campaign for Community Banking Services said it was concerned that branch closures were “proceeding at a faster pace than any alternatives that are being put in place to assist vulnerable customers”.
Which? said that 56% of adults used online banking last year, leaving about 20 million adults who did not use it. “Among them will be people who aren’t online and those with a poor broadband connection,” it said.
Guardian research has indicated that HSBC branches being axed in January 2017 include: Eccleshill in Bradford, Barnard Castle in County Durham, Moreton-in-Marsh in Gloucestershire, Lister Gate in Nottingham, Holbeach in Lincolnshire and Glossop in Derbyshire (all 6 January); Cowes and Shanklin, both on the Isle of Wight, Holmfirth in West Yorkshire, Rye in East Sussex and Cinderford in Gloucestershire (all 13 January); Malmesbury in Wiltshire and Whitchurch in Cardiff (20 January); and Shepton Mallet and Burnham-on-Sea, both in Somerset, Kingstanding in Birmingham and Nantwich in Cheshire (27 January).
Peter Vicary-Smith, the chief executive officer at Which?, said: “Banks can and must do a better job of working with their customers to understand their needs and those of the local community, especially when they are making changes to the services they offer or closing branches.”
HSBC said there had been huge changes since its UK branch network was established more than a century ago, with many people moving their banking online. Overall footfall in its branches had fallen by more than 40%, with 93% of contact with the bank now by phone or online and 97% of cash withdrawals made via an ATM.
“We do review our branch network to make sure they are in the right locations for our customers and we have a sustainable network for the future. When we do make the decision to close a branch, our main priority is to ensure that our customers and their banking needs are catered for in the best way possible.”
Britain’s 4G mobile phone coverage is worse than that in Albania, Panama, Peru and Romania, with users able to connect barely half the time, a government infrastructure watchdog has found.
In a major new report, the National Infrastructure Commission said the UK is being held back by poor mobile phone connectivity, as it called for an end to “digital deserts” in places that should have adequate signals such as rail routes, roads and city centres.
Countries including the US and Japan already have data volumes four to five higher than the UK, the report found.
The commission, chaired by Andrew Adonis, the crossbench peer and former Labour minister, said the government must now ensure that the next generation of 5G spectrum does not have the failures that dog 4G coverage.
“Britain is 54th in the world for 4G coverage, and the typical user can only access 4G barely half the time,” Adonis said. “Our 4G network is worse than Romania and Albania, Panama and Peru. Our roads and railways can feel like digital deserts and even our city centres are plagued by not spots where connectivity is impossible.
“That isn’t just frustrating, it is increasingly holding British business back as more and more of our economy requires a connected workforce.”
In a list of recommendations, it argued there should be a new dedicated cabinet minister in charge of the UK’s digital future, ensuring mobile connectivity is competitive with the rest of the world.
On top of that, it called for ministers and Ofcom, the media regulator, to work together to ensure a set of standards known as a universal service obligation no later than 2025.
The crucial priorities for coverage are key rail routes, major roads such as motorways and all towns and cities, Adonis said. 
“5G is the future – ultra-fast and ultra-reliable, it has the potential to change our lives and our economy in ways we cannot even imagine today. But the UK is currently languishing in the digital slow lane,” he added.
“5G offers us a chance to start again and get ahead. If government acts now we can ensure our major transport networks and urban centres are 5G ready in time to give British industry every chance to lead the world in exploiting its applications.
“But none of this will matter unless we bring our mobile network up to speed. The existing system does not provide the level of coverage we will need in our connected future. We need a new universal service obligation which ensures that the mobile essentials – like text, talk and data – are available to us wherever we need them.”
Grant Shapps, the former Tory chairman who now leads the British Infrastructure Group of MPs, said the report should be a wakeup call for the government, as he accused them of being too willing to listen to the excuses of mobile phone operators about poor signal.
“This confirms what we have been saying for a long time. Over the years, ministers have been far too easy on the glib promises given by the telecoms providers and I think that has been combined with ineffective and weak regulation from Ofcom,” Shapps said.
“Britain cannot afford to repeat the outcome of the 5G network that we have had with the 4G network and so the British Infrastructure is calling on the prime minister to appoint a cabinet minister to oversee the recommendations of this report and make sure this person is accountable for delivering 5G throughout the UK.
“Unfortunately there has been a very long history of believing what the telecoms companies say rather than questioning it. The fact the report was commissioned is a good thing but Britain should be all about infrastructure in this post-Brexit world and here is a real wake-up call to make sure it actually happens this time.”
The National Infrastructure Commission was established last year by George Osborne, the then chancellor, to advise the government on critical challenges related to the UK’s networks such as transport, telecommunications, energy and utilities.
5G networks are not expected to become available until 2020 but Ofcom has already begun preparations for auctioning off the spectrum.
The round of 4G auctions raised less than Osborne had hoped for in 2012 and much of the UK is still plagued with “not spots” of poor signal.
In a recent report backed by 90 MPs from all parties, the British Infrastructure Group proposed an amendment to the government’s digital economy bill to allow Ofcom to fine mobile operators that did not meet the targets of a 2014 agreement.
That deal gave the four large network operators (MNOs) another chance to fix mobile “not spots” after they said they would pump £5bn into improving coverage across the UK by December 2017 in return for the government not pursuing a system of national roaming.
BIG said it found little evidence to suggest that the mobile sector would meet the targets of this agreement to provide coverage to 90% of the UK’s geographic area, and called for a progress update to be published by the end of 2016.
Michel Roux Jr apologises for paying chefs less than minimum wage
Labour is to guarantee older voters that it will keep benefits such as free TV licences, bus passes and the winter fuel allowance as well as the so-called triple lock guarantee on pensions following Brexit.
As part of a concerted party effort to boost its support among older voters, the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, and shadow pensions secretary, Debbie Abrahams, are to visit an older people’s centre in south London on Wednesday to make the announcement.
At the 2015 election, Labour’s support among the over-65s – the demographic group most likely to vote – slipped to about 25%. Guaranteeing the triple lock is seen as a way to boost its standing with older voters, but is likely to prove controversial.
The triple lock, introduced in 2010, sets out that state pensions should increase each year by whichever is the highest figure from the increase in average earnings, the consumer price index or 2.5%. Labour had previously said it would keep the system in place over the next parliament.
The triple lock has been criticised as excessively skewing government spending towards an older generation which has, overall, suffered less from economic woes in recent years.
Last month’s report from the Commons work and pensions committee labelled the triple lock “unfair and unsustainable” and questioned other benefits such as the winter fuel allowance.
The triple lock went against the idea of a welfare state “underpinned by an implicit intergenerational contract”, said Labour MP Frank Field, who chairs the committee.
He said: “Each generation is supported in retirement by their in-work successors. But a combination of factors has sent the balance out of kilter. It is now the working young and their children who face the daunting challenge of getting on in an economy skewed against them.”
McDonnell and Abrahams are due to announce the policy on a visit to Southwark Pensioners Centre in Camberwell.
McDonnell said: “After six wasted years of Tory economic failure that has seen some have to wait longer to receive their pension, and those in work approaching retirement having to work longer with earnings stagnating, Labour won’t let them face further uncertainty or reductions in income.”
The imminent departure from the EU meant there was “too much uncertainty for those on fixed incomes”, he said.
Abrahams said: “When taken with our plans to defend the NHS and end the Tory crisis of social care, it is clear that only a Labour government will guarantee a dignified living standard for older people.”
There is another even stronger reason not to look to council tax to pay for social care (Councils spend less than ‘floor price’ on social care for elderly, 13 December). Poor people would have to meet the cost. This is due to abolition by the coalition government of their previous entitlement to council tax benefit – and successive governments’ failure to get the better-off to pay their fair share by revaluing properties to reflect current values and introducing new higher tax bands.
The government’s transitional grant for the discretionary relief scheme which replaced council tax benefit was soon withdrawn at the same time as government grant to local authorities was being cut – and is soon to disappear altogether with termination of the revenue support grant which used to be the main source of government funding.
Few councils are now able to support poor council tax payers to the level of the old benefit entitlement. In most parts of the country almost everyone has to pay council tax, including people on jobseeker’s allowance, employment and support allowance, income support and pension credit. Poor people cannot afford to pay what is already demanded of them, let alone more. Council tax is now so regressive as to mirror the poll tax. No wonder so many authorities are reluctant to raise the full social care precept and increase further the already steep growth in proceedings for arrears of council tax, with its attendant misery.
The government must face up to the crisis and increase its funding to local authorities through progressive taxation. The most vulnerable members of our society are suffering untold misery without relief in sight. Are we a civilised society or not? This is the major test of us as good neighbours in deed as well as word.
David Plank
Cambridge
• To provide desperately needed funding for social care, the government plans to allow councils to increase council tax. We must care for those who are disabled, ill and infirm, but the problem is that council tax is regressive – falling hardest on poorer people, because it takes up a much greater share of their income. We must not increase the load on those who are already struggling to stay afloat.
Tax is the price we pay for a civilised society. In a civilised society, we look after those who need care. In a civilised society, we also give more if we can afford more. In the context of cuts to taxes on corporations, avoidance of tax by the wealthy and a £370m refurbishment of Buckingham Palace, the government must find a way to share this necessary burden more fairly, so that those who are struggling are not made more desperate.
Angela Dennis
Kingston upon Thames
• Odd, isn’t it, that a country pleading poverty, a country refusing to afford proper care for its people, readily affords boundless care for places? Though only special places, of course. Those like Jersey, the Caymans, the British Virgin Islands, Bermuda, the City, the Isle of Man and on and on.
When will Mrs May acknowledge that tax-dodging, money-laundering and routine corruption cost this country far, far more than caring for people ever will? And when will she do something about it beyond reinventing the poll tax?
John Smith
Sheffield
• How to meet the spiralling costs of adult social care? To put it on the council tax will not even scratch the surface of the problem in Lincolnshire, where we have the highest proportion of senior citizens in the east Midlands and one of the lowest council tax bases. To suggest this is a cop-out. We need to take the politics out of this and stop just passing the buck.
The only way to finance a problem that will not go away is for us all to make a greater contribution, through national insurance contributions and/or by biting the bullet and paying higher income tax. It may now be time to combine spending on health and social care as well.
John Marriott
North Hykeham, Lincolnshire
• The growing crisis in social care is generally described in terms of the impact on the wider healthcare system, with some commentators also acknowledging the anxiety caused among the huge number of frail and vulnerable residents of care homes and their families who could find themselves being victims of a market failure. But there is another equally large group of people who will be badly affected if the system does collapse under the weight of governmental lack of interest and blame-shifting – the many thousands of people, predominantly in low-paid work, who stand to lose their jobs. When it looked like Nissan was considering whether to continue manufacturing in the north-east, ministers pulled out the stops, and deals were done to calm corporate nerves. If things are as bad as they seem to be in the care sector then far more jobs are now at stake – the difference being that they are not all in one town, and the workforce is overwhelmingly female. The time for ministerial intervention has come.
Les Bright
Exeter, Devon
• If it wasn’t already obvious, the Conservative government have all but admitted that they don’t know how to fix the problems with social care provision. So why don’t they ask Ed Miliband what he was planning to do before the 2015 general election, when he was the one talking about addressing the upstream problems with social care funding that were in turn putting additional burdens on the NHS (as opposed to just promising to throw money at the NHS as the Conservatives and Lib Dems said they’d do)? They’ve pinched most of his other manifesto policies already, so what difference will pinching another make?
David Wall
Northampton
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Richard Layard is promoting the idea that better provision of mental health services is more important than reducing social inequalities in promoting human happiness (Happiness depends on health and friends, not money, says new study, theguardian.com, 12 December). This is a false dichotomy. Evidence suggests that austerity damages our collective health. Deepening economic and social divides, bullying, abuse, misogyny, racism, dehumanisation and consequent insecurity, trauma, social exclusion, neglect and despair underpin the current tsunami of desolation in the UK and beyond, especially in our children. These are largely economic and political matters, requiring cultural, social and political solutions. Psychological therapies, humanely delivered to those who want them, have a part to play in ameliorating human suffering, and we do need more flexible, kind and supportive services. But we must not pathologise those who are damaged by the injustices they experience. Degradation by the benefits system is now devastating many with long-term illnesses in the UK. To imagine that therapy, rather than social transformation, can address or prevent the conditions that lead to despair is to be wilfully blind. 
Annie Mitchell Clinical and community psychologist, Helen Beckwith Clinical psychologist, Jan Bostock Clinical and community psychologist, Anna Daiches Clinical psychologist, Suzanne Elliot Clinical psychologist, Danielle Gaynor Clinical psychologist, Carl Harris Clinical and community psychologist, Jennifer Marris Psychologist, James Randall-James Clinical psychologist in training, Eleanor Schoultz Clinical psychologist, Sarah Wolf Clinical psychologist in training, Sally Zlotovitz Community psychologist
• Workplace happiness is not about the trivial (The cult of compulsory happiness is ruining our workplaces, 12 December). Micromanagement, being told what to do and blame cultures are the kind of things that make people unhappy at work. Instead, enable people to do work they are good at, give them the trust and freedom to do it well, have managers who coach rather than tell, and create a no-blame environment. The result will be happier staff and more productive organisations.
Henry Stewart
Chief happiness officer, Happy Ltd (founder and former CEO)
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
In London Bridge station at 9.30am on Tuesday, big red crosses in LED lights shone above all but three of the 15 platforms. Beneath them, a young woman darted, talking into a hands-free mobile phone headset.
“I have an exam today and I don’t think I’m going to make it on time,” Benan Yolcu, 21, said. She was trying to get to Brighton, where she is studying law and criminology.
She had known a strike was coming but said that when she checked a rail timetable app there was nothing to suggest it was that day. “I thought it was not going to be today,” she said. “And when I checked online [on a rail timetable app] it said that everything was running normally.”
Yolcu was one of thousands of commuters caught up in the first of three days of strike action by train drivers on Southern rail. Staff have walked out over plans to dispense with control of the doors by guards on all the operator’s services.
All Southern’s 2,242 weekday services were cancelled as a result of the industrial action by train drivers’ union Aslef. As a result, London Bridge, a terminus for Southern services, was quiet at what would have been the tail end of the morning rush hour.
Commuters were urged not to travel. But that message had not got through to the dozens who turned up at Balham station, in south-west London, for their morning train. Jessica Knight, 23, arrived there just before 8am, hoping to make her way to work at a branch of Savills, the estate agent, in Richmond.
“I didn’t realise it was completely not working,” she said. “It’s annoying because there are so many people trying to get to work and do their jobs. They need to sort it out, really.”
Joseph Volcy, 32, who works in digital marketing, was another of those turned away at Balham. “I just didn’t know and it’s awful,” he said. “By the way I’m seeing it I won’t get to work until 11, because it’s in Kingston. I need to get on my phone, talk to all my clients one by one.
“It’s not the first time. I’m really disappointed. The train is never on time, sometimes it says it’s coming and just disappears. I’m thinking I have to move house. It’s bad because it really affects your morale.”
Many found that journeys they expected to measure in minutes stretched into hours. Allie Filippova, from Croydon, said her 45-minute trip to Clapham took two hours.
”I usually take the train to Balham in the mornings to get the Northern line to Clapham. This morning I took the No 50 bus, but after 90 minutes it stopped in the middle of nowhere for no apparent reason,” she said.
However, such a delay was not unusual, according to Filippova, even when drivers were working: “Last night it took me 1hr 40mins to get home because of unreliable Southern trains and a bus that also terminated early for no reason.”
Rebecca Ellis, from Coulsdon, avoided tortuous travel arrangements by staying with her boyfriend in central London. “My step-mum is having to stay at a friend’s for the next few days, and my father is having to book a hotel,” she said.
“All in all, I’d say we as a family are completely sick of these strikes. We understand the point of the unions, but we think both parties need to be stopped. It feels like for December we are in a constant state of unrest for work commitments.
“My life shouldn’t be dictated by rail strikes, but it has, and will continue to be until this madness stops. Too many evenings I have stood cold with hundreds of other commuters waiting for 30-45 minutes, sometimes longer for delayed or cancelled trains. Many times in the morning we have fought to get on an already packed train because they refuse to run a regular service, or simply cannot because of driver’s on strike. 
“This whole situation has been an appalling mess for the past year, and I, as a citizen, demand the government do something.”
Being a tenant is lonely. Where do they turn when landlords or letting agents bully them into paying more, unlawfully evict them, or refuse to carry out repairs? For once the news is good: the Bristol-based tenants rights group Acorn is looking to raise money to pay for staff in order to become a genuine nationwide tenants union, with all its concomitant admin costs. Living Rent (which campaigns for renting rights in Scotland) is also hiring a staff member.
Tenants need someone to represent their interests. Their homes are (in England at least) easily sold beneath their feet, and no-fault eviction notices destroy security. Renters move forlornly between frequent short-term lets, their lives precarious and peace of mind fleeting (although new laws will improve our lot in Scotland).
Tenants in the London borough of Hackney have Hackney Renters to speak for them, and nationally Generation Rent campaigns in the media. Both are excellent but too busy to provide individual representation, for example in court. The solution is obvious: a properly funded, well-organised professional tenants union. Judging by the problems shared on Acorn’s Facebook group what’s needed is advice, advocacy and mediation during disputes with owners.
Landlords have the Residential Landlords Association yodelling loudly for their cause. More invidious for tenants are letting agents who vociferously defend buy-to-let investors’ interests, sometimes against the needs and rights of the tenants paying rent. Agents have their own group, the Association of Residential Letting Agents, which speaks for landlord rights as part of its remit. But still landlords feel hard done by.
One of the most vexatious aspects of letting agents is the notorious and pointless quarterly inspection, where they stroll around the flat noting minor faults. It would be satisfying to call up the tenants union rep to accompany them on their mission, to record faults in the property, recommend repairs or improvements, and speak to rent officers when assessing rent levels (where this is still a possibility).
Working tenants struggle because of dwindling legal aid and because the growing burdens on Citizens Advice force them to pay for legal advice and to represent themselves at possession hearings. The largest single cause of homelessness is a private tenancy ending for no fault (often a so-called “revenge eviction” after a renter requests repairs). A properly staffed and funded tenants union is not merely desirable, but essential in a world where many police forces are still ignorant of the fact that wrongful or unlawful eviction is a crime with the potential for a prison sentence. Tenants need support, as many are terrified by the very thought of a court appearance and, when confronted by a landlord’s legal team must conduct their own case.
At the moment, renters are stuck. They rely on an informal yet occasionally effective network of pro bono legal advice or wisdom from the shared experience of fellow sufferers, yet some tenants are scared by the very sight of a court letter. Imagine if we had house lawyers or a firm on retainer?
A tenants union could speak up for their interests at Westminster and Holyrood, ideally even sponsoring an MP (or MSP). We also need active interventions, as when Acorn in Bristol picketed a property after bailiffs were due to evict a family.
A tenants union would mediate to resolve disputes over repairs, and stand up for tenants at risk of eviction, either by providing legal representation or accompanying tenants to meetings and hearings, and negotiating with errant landlords and their agents intent on emphasising the apparent powerlessness of tenants by feeding their fear.
Tenants rarely actually trash their homes. But landlords are known to save money by hiring “tenancy eviction specialists” to throw tenants out. It would be wonderful to have a union to watch our back: someone to call if intimidating heavies are hammering on the door.
When tenants misbehave, landlords lose money. When landlords misbehave, tenants lose their home. And thanks to Acorn in England and Living Rent in Scotland a tenants union is starting to look like a reality. With millions of tenants in the UK’s private sector, even a small monthly subscription would pay for properly resourced staff. That’s a lot of voters. The formation of a tenants union is one sign that this sleeping tiger is awake and starting to roar.
Gyrations in the oil market meant it was a stone-cold certainty that inflation would be on the rise in late 2016. This time last year the price of crude was crashing, which put strong downward pressure on the cost of living. The annual inflation rate is the sum of price movements in the latest 12 months, so last year’s price falls are gradually dropping out. As they do, inflation automatically goes up.
This trend is, however, is being amplified by two other factors. The first is that oil prices are not just holding steady: as a result of the deal between oil-producing countries to curb production they are going up. A year ago, it was possible to find unleaded petrol at around £1 a litre; this Christmas it will be £1.20 a litre.
The second factor is the 15% depreciation of the pound since the EU referendum in June. Although sterling has been edging higher for the past month, the lagged effect of its drop during the summer and early autumn is making imports dearer. A pick-up in producer price inflation – the cost of goods leaving factory gates – is early evidence of this effect.
At 1.2%, inflation remains below the government’s 2% target but it will not remain there for long. Prices fell by 0.8% in January 2016 and unless that fall is replicated next month (which it won’t be), inflation will rise. It is likely to hit 2% by the spring and 3% by the end of the year, unless the price-fixing deal for oil falls apart and the cost of crude comes crashing down again.
Historically, an inflation rate of 2% to 3% is relatively modest for the UK. It will still be enough, however, to put a pronounced squeeze on living standards next year, because prices are going to rise faster than wages.
Grocery prices are falling by just 0.1%, the lowest rate in more than two years, as increases in the cost of fresh fish, beer and chilled ready meals offset falls in basics, including vegetables, eggs and pork.
In the three months to 4 December, deflation in the grocery market fell to its lowest level since September 2014, according to industry data from Kantar Worldpanel, narrowing from a 0.5% drop reported last month.
Despite near flat prices overall, Tesco was the only one of the big four supermarkets to record sales growth, according to Kantar, up 1.6% but still a slowdown from the 2.2% reported last month.
Sales fell at Sainsbury’s, Asda and Morrisons, by 0.6%, 4.7% and 1.4% respectively, but all three improved their performance compared with last month as shoppers snapped up their premium own-label ranges ahead of Christmas.
Fraser McKevitt, of Kantar Worldpanel, said Morrisons’ The Best and Asda’s Extra Special put on particularly impressive performances, with sales increasing by 35% and 15% respectively.
In contrast, there was a further slowdown in sales growth at discounters Aldi and Lidl. Although Aldi is still the fastest-growing chain in the market, with sales up 10%, Lidl’s pace of growth slipped to 5.7%, from 6.1% last month. For the second month in a row it was outpaced by the British discounter Iceland, where sales rose 8.6%.
The discounters are coming under pressure after the big four cut prices on key lines in a bid to fight back more effectively. Meanwhile, as inflation has begun to kick in as a result of the falling value of the pound against the euro and the dollar since the Brexit vote, the discounters have been forced to put up the price of basics, including milk and bananas.
Data from another market research agency, Nielsen, suggested grocery market sales in the four weeks to 3 December had fallen by 0.4% as the volume of goods slid 0.3% – the first time sales and volumes had dropped since July.
Mike Watkins, Nielsen’s UK head of retailer and business insight, put this down to the distraction of Black Friday, the US-inspired discount day in late November, which he said had encouraged shoppers to buy non-food items elsewhere.
Watkins said he expected momentum to build in the runup to Christmas, helped by Christmas Eve falling on a Saturday.
 Nielsen estimates shoppers will spend around £4bn at supermarkets in the final week, with 22 December expected to be the biggest day of the year. “This year should end on a bit of a high note, with more visits that week, and sales up versus last year despite the ongoing price deflation,” he said.
The UK housebuilder Bellway has started buying land again because business has been strong in the months following the Brexit vote.
Bellway had suspended its acquisition programme to protect itself from potential market volatility arising from the referendum result in June.
Reservations, which involve homebuyers paying a fee to reserve a property, rose 7% in the four months to early December, to 176 a week. Bellway said it expected to build 5% more homes in the current financial year which ends on 31 July 2017.
“Whilst remaining mindful of the longer term uncertainty as a result of the vote to leave the EU, the positive autumn trading performance has given the board reassurance to cautiously recommence the group’s programme of land acquisition, following a brief planned hiatus in the weeks after the referendum,” the Newcastle-based company said.
In a trading update for the 18 weeks to 4 December, Bellway said it had entered into contracts to buy 40 new sites and had spent £263m on land.
Ted Ayres, the chief executive, said the outlook for UK housing demand was strong, boosted by low mortgage rates and the government’s help to buy equity loan scheme, which will be closed by the end of the year. The scheme was used in in 37% of Bellway’s reservations during the four-month period, up from 29% a year earlier.
Ayres said: “The group has made an encouraging start to the financial year and customer demand for new homes continues to be robust. The strength of the underlying housing market supports further growth.”
Bellway said selling prices were in line with expectations: “The pricing environment is firm across the country in those areas where the group has a presence, with sales prices achieved on reservations in line with expectations. In London, where Bellway’s focus continues to be on affordably priced new homes, prices have remained stable and demand robust.”
The update from Bellway is the latest sign that British consumers have so far shrugged off uncertainty arising from the Brexit vote. Consumer spending continued to be a key driver of economic growth in the third quarter of 2016.
Her name, according to the cheap cardboard label, is “Shu Yi baby”, but the large plastic doll in a lurid green outfit will not be welcomed into any UK households as a gift on Christmas Day.
After being impounded at Felixstowe by trading standards officials, the imported toy has been declared unsafe after undergoing tests and will be destroyed.
In a draughty warehouse on the edge ofthe UK’s busiest port – and commercial gateway for the Far East – officers are stepping up their fight against dangerous goods that flood the Christmas gift market. They are focusing on what they consider high risk products such as toys, electrical items, cosmetics and power tools.
“The doll came in a large consignment from the far east and probably cost a few cents, or pence,” declares Phil Reed, an import surveillance officer with the National Trading Standards, tugging at the doll’s clothing and soft moulded plastic feet. Tests on the dolls were carried out last month after the container that delivered them was impounded. Reed has now received the test results and they are alarming. They reveal that the toy’s feet contain harmful levels of chemicals that can cause long-term health problems. The use of phthalates, which can disrupt children’s hormones, is tightly restricted across Europe where toy manufacturers must restrict content to very low levels.
But the laboratory tests show that the levels in this toy – destined for pre-Christmas markets and car boot sales – breach regulations. In addition, the doll has a bogus CE mark that suggests – falsely – that she meets recognised EU safety standards. “This is purporting to be a stamp of approval and appears to be a deliberate attempt to mislead consumers,” says Reed.
Also tested from the same consignment were “plush” dolls, made from a furry synthetic fabric, where weak zips and easy access to battery compartments failed the safety assessment and were deemed to be dangerous choking hazards for young children. 
Reed is surrounded by piles of bulging cardboard boxes on pallets in Shed 70 - a warehouse the size of a football pitch, where the selected contents of some containers coming into Felixstowe are inspected.
More than 40% of all imported goods coming into the UK do so via Felixstowe, where it typically takes three days to unload the up to 19,224 containers on the world’s biggest capacity cargo ship, the 395m MSC Oscar.
A staggering 4m full containers come through the port every year, and Reed – part of the NTS’s ports and borders team and working as part of Suffolk Trading Standards’ own team – is responsible for organising and carrying out regular inspections. “ It would be difficult for any agency to examine anything but a very small proportion of the containers arriving at the port each year,” says Reed. “Therefore we base our examinations on those which we consider to pose the greatest safety risk to consumers. Or we might be focusing our attention on those importers or traders who have a history of importing non-compliant and unsafe products.”
At one end of the warehouse are stacks of boxes – plastered with yellow warning labels – whose contents have already been impounded by trading standards. At the opposite end sit the contents of one container that has been emptied completely awaiting inspection. This container was singled out because the far east-based company that despatched the goods had no UK or EU base while a UK residential address had been used for VAT registration.
Reed opened some boxes and found electrical products that are proving popular in the run-up to the Christmas including hair straightening brushes, steam facial cleansers and portable chargers. He is constantly on the lookout for products with faulty plugs and chargers that can overheat and cause fires.
The volume of imported drones suggests that they will be popular as Christmas toys, Reed says, recalling a hectic period this time last year as officials seized thousands of unsafe hoverboards.
“One particular trend we have spotted is the growth in “micro-importers” – consumers in the UK who order half or even a whole container of goods to import for onward sale,” adds Reed. “They have no idea what they are buying and are not interested in finding out. This can lead to fake, and often dangerous, products such as hoverboards ending up in people’s homes.”
Cosmetics are also increasingly a problem where they contain a higher proportion of restricted chemicals than is allowed by law. A black henna hair dye popular with ethnic communities has in some cases been found to have more than 2% of the chemical PPD, which can cause burning of the scalp and skin. 
In September the trading standards team intercepted four separate consignments of nail manicure lamps and nail decoration kits from China because they were unsafe. They were found to have hazards including lack of proper insulation and unsafe plugs and fuses.
Consumers were warned that some of these kits may have found their way onto shopping websites like Amazon and eBay. However, the consignment of Shu Yi baby dolls will not get underneath the Christmas tree.
Electrical products about which trading standards officers are urging consumers to be vigilant
I have been having problems with Great Western Railway over refunds for late trains – three are outstanding – and I am sure I am not alone. The first dates back to the end of August when I made the claim the day after travel. Having heard nothing by the end of September, I sent an email to GWR’s managing director, Mark Hopwood, and received a polite reply asking for details of my case (which I did the same day) and promising to look into it.
By the beginning of November I had heard nothing and again emailed Hopwood. Once more I received a reply the following day asking for the details and promising to look into it. These were sent immediately.
I have heard nothing since. I would suggest that this shows something is wrong with GWR’s administration.
As far as I can make out it is running at least three months behind on claims, even if you contact the MD. The current spate of cancellations due to recent Storm Angus is not going to help. JH, London
Although it’s now common for consumers to contact company bosses directly (and there are entire websites dedicated to listing their contact details) you really shouldn’t have had to be in this position over simple refunds for late running services, to which you are entitled.
This is bread and butter for train companies but, inevitably, backlogs do build up following exceptional and ongoing poor weather conditions, including flooding.
Many railway lines were affected by major flooding from Storm Angus in November, reporting delays and blocked lines. Great Western Railway even advised commuters not to travel owing to the “severe flooding at a number of separate locations” across its network.
The company has apologised to you for dragging its feet and sent you £88 in refunds. “We are sorry for the time it has taken our customer service team to respond. We’ve recently moved our contact centre to a new site, bringing all our customer service work back to the UK, and the move means some detailed responses are taking longer than we would like. We are working with our new team to improve our response rates.”
That said, we are still receiving complaints from readers about delays in receiving compensation.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Most employers expect to boost job numbers in the new year as the post-referendum panic fades.
ManpowerGroup, the recruitment agency, said its quarterly survey of employers found they have shrugged off concerns about the impact of Brexit to report an improved outlook for the first three months of 2017.
The survey, which is based on responses from 2,104 UK employers, reported a rise of two points in its employment index to +7%, the highest level of optimism in two years.
Mark Cahill, the managing director of ManpowerGroup UK, said: “Employers are still unsure about what exactly Brexit will mean, but are not letting that uncertainty deter them from hiring.”
In a warning to ministers keen to clamp down on immigration, he said: “Some employers may be looking to bring in talent before any curbs to freedom of movement across the European Union come into effect, as more than half of all the jobs created by UK employers this year went to EU workers.”
He said transport jobs were hit by a ruling against the ride-hailing app company Uber that appeared to put dampener on the demand for private hire drivers. But construction workers were expecting a bumper pay day as the government prepared to increase spending on infrastructure projects and boost housebuilding, with scaffolders commanding salaries of £50,000 a year or more in the east of the UK.
Households face further pressure from rising inflation as experts predicted a surge in petrol prices following an agreement by oil producers to cut global output.
The cost of petrol is close to rising above £1.20 a litre in some parts of the UK after a weekend deal between members of the Opec oil cartel and non-Opec countries.
The AA motorists’ organisation said the deal would add about 3p to the cost of a litre of fuel after the price of Brent crude climbed to more than $57 a barrel in the wake of the agreement.
With UK inflation already expected to jump above 1% in official figures for November out on Tuesday, the latest rise in oil prices will begin to justify forecasts that inflation is heading for between 2.5% and 4% by the end of 2017.
Opec, which accounts for about 40% of world supply and whose members include Saudi Arabia, said the deal with non-Opec members Russia, Mexico and Bahrain would result in a reduction of 558,000 barrels a day from 1 January.
Although less than the targeted 600,000 barrels, it was the largest ever contribution to production cuts by non-Opec members and was the first such agreement between Opec and non-Opec members for 15 years.
The move follows an agreement last month by Opec members to cut production by 1.2m barrels a day, also from the New Year, that followed weeks of wrangling.
In January, Brent crude prices plunged to almost $27 a barrel and the price at the pumps dropped to £1 a litre in some areas. But a recovery in demand for oil, especially from China and Europe, and the prospect of a deal orchestrated by Saudi Arabia to cut production has sent prices heading upwards.
Brent crude jumped more than 6% to $57.89 a barrel, its highest level since mid-July 2015. 
The AA said the average price would rise from £1.15 a litre for unleaded petrol to £1.18, though in London and parts of the south-east, where prices have already hit £1.17, the figure could rise above £1.20.
Adding to the oil price momentum was a comment from Saudi Arabia suggesting it could make bigger cuts than first envisaged. The Saudi oil minister, Khalid al-Falih, said: “I can tell you with absolute certainty that effective 1 January, we’re going to cut and cut substantially to be below the level that we have committed to on 30 November.”
Meanwhile, Iraq’s oil minister Jabar al-Luaibi told Reuters the country was committed to complying with the pact, although it was confident it had the potential to raise output in the future. He said: “The cuts will aim at the figures we agreed with Opec definitely, but [for] the areas of the cuts there are many options on the table.”
But the prospect of US shale producers continuing to raise their own output levels, offsetting cuts by Opec, meant analysts were divided over whether the oil price has further to climb.
Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at Forex.com, said a Trump-inspired growth spurt in the US and a recovery in China could spur demand for oil at a time when Opec has found a way to restrict supply.
“Make no mistake about it – this historic agreement is a gamechanger. Although the crude oil rally has already started at the end of last month when the Opec first announced the deal, I think there is plenty of fuel left in this rally,” he said.
“Admittedly, after a big gap we may see a retracement of some sort in prices now but ultimately the fundamentals still point to higher levels going forward. The oil market will now be balanced earlier than would have been the case without a deal.
“It is very likely that US shale producers will take advantage of this opportunity to ramp up their crude output once again but this will be a worry for another day.
David Hufton, a strategist at oil brokers PVM Oil Associates, said oil supplies were still expanding despite the deal and warned the price of oil was driven more “by speculative players, moving in herds”.
Gene McGillian, manager of market research at Tradition Energy in Stamford, Connecticut, said the Brent crude price was likely to be capped at $60. “Right now the market is kind of feeding on itself,” he said.
“The market could push [West Texas] another $1 to $2 up to $55, and Brent could go to about $60, but at that point there are some concerns that are going to start to cap the rally.”
Luke Bosdet, oil analyst at the AA, said US shale producers would react by increasing production to benefit from the higher oil price.
“They have become more efficient during the two years of low prices and many firms can now make money at prices below $60 a barrel,” he said.
Online fashion retailer Asos has unveiled plans to hire 1,500 staff at its London headquarters and to double domestic manufacturing of its own-brand clothing.
The company, which employs 2,500 people at the site in Camden, north London, said it expected to spend about £38m on additional specialists in technology, marketing, editorial content and retail as it aims to double sales over the next five years.
It is investing another £40m in building an additional 40,000 sq ft (3,700 sq metres) at its base at the art deco Greater London House, formerly the Carreras cigarette factory, to house the extra workers.
Nick Beighton, the chief executive, said Asos expected to open several more manufacturing facilities in the UK over the next three to four years, in order to double capacity from the two factories which make about 4% of its own-label products at present.
The move is good news for UK fashion manufacturing, which was decimated in the 1990s when work moving abroad but has begun to see a renaissance in recent years amid rising costs in China and increasing demand for high fashion made quickly.
Asos has been investing in training workers in the capital for more than five years at a factory in Haringey, north London, which employs about 100 people, 40 of whom are stitching dresses for Asos, Marks & Spencer and online specialist Finery.
Asos’s UK investment is the latest financial commitment to the UK by a major digital business. It follows significant investment announcements from Facebook and Google, which plan to increase their staff numbers in the UK, despite fears that Brexit would make the country a less attractive place to invest.
Alongside a number of British online retailers, Asos has benefited from the drop in the value of the pound, because almost 60% of its sales are outside the UK.
Asos said the renovation of its HQ would include new staircases and light wells, a health club, training academy and “quiet zone library”, plus a tech bar and concierge service for staff.
Beighton said: “Our people are what make Asos special. We are creating a workspace that fosters creativity, where they can enjoy what they do.”
Asos is one of the companies that have come under scrutiny over working practices at their warehouses in recent months, after the Guardian’s disclosure last year that temporary workers at Sports Direct were being paid less than the minimum wage.
Neil Derrick, the Yorkshire regional secretary of the GMB union which has led protests against conditions at a warehouse near Barnsley which handles distribution for Asos, said: “We welcome the announcement of 1,500 new jobs at Asos but not when GMB’s concerns for the workers in Yorkshire have been completely ignored.
“The company’s growth is on back of workers in their Yorkshire warehouse, yet there seems to be a huge disparity between how Asos staff in London and workers in Yorkshire are treated. Conditions in Barnsley are frankly shocking and have caused the GMB grave concern over the past two years.
“If Asos want to provide ‘fashion with integrity’ as they claim, working with us to make their Yorkshire site a decent place to work would be a start.”
Britain’s financial watchdog has launched a review of the mortgage market that will probe the “inducements” routinely paid to brokers and other industry players, to see whether consumers are losing out as a result.
The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) market study will look at whether competition in the mortgage sector can be improved, and whether commercial tie-ups between the sector’s different players “lead to conflicts of interest or misaligned incentives to the detriment of consumers”.
The regulator said that while commercial agreements between mortgage lenders, brokers and the like may provide some benefits, it was concerned they may also result in competition not working in the best interests of consumers.
The FCA aims to publish its interim findings next summer ahead of a final report in early 2018. Resulting action could range from market-wide remedies such as new rules or a referral to the Competition and Markets Authority, to measures aimed at one or more individual companies such as financial penalties.
The watchdog is particularly keen to look into the inducements paid by lenders to mortgage brokers, by brokers to estate agents and developers, and to other third parties including price comparison websites.
It said inducements paid by lenders to brokers – such as so-called procuration fees, which are often several hundred pounds for each mortgage – “may influence brokers’ advice and limit the number of lenders both on their panel, and those that they recommend”. This in turn may create a barrier to entry for some lenders, and limit consumer choice.
The FCA said it was interested in exploring the extent to which brokers’ advice could be biased due to lenders paying different levels of procuration fee and “soft incentives” to brokers. 
It is also keen to look into the incentives that estate agents had to refer consumers to their in-house brokers, and whether this led to worse outcomes for consumers.
The watchdog said some firms had mentioned the “close relationships” between housing developers and certain brokers, and that it wanted to explore the links between mortgage firms and price comparison websites in order to understand whether inducements were influencing how search results were ranked and displayed.
Christopher Woolard, the watchdog’s executive director of strategy and competition, said: “As a mortgage is likely to be the biggest financial commitment most people make in their lifetime, we’re keen to ensure that competition in the mortgage sector is healthy and working to the benefit of consumers.”
Local councils have generally responded practically and effectively to the financial squeeze since 2010. They have managed matters internally and not engaged in a great deal of reaching out to the public. Even if the government lifts the cap on council tax rises in an effort to address the crisis in social care, as has been reported, the pressures on other, non-statutory services are likely to intensify. As a consequence of this new financial reality, different council strategies are now coming to the fore. But how to discuss cuts with citizens?
Many local government services are at a pinch point. Libraries, for instance, took a £25m hit to their budgets in the year to March 2016, and many other council services are facing big cuts. The National Audit Office in its 2014 report was complimentary about the way in which local government has adapted. Savings have been made through reducing employee levels, selling assets, and making other cost-reductions, rather than engaging in fundamental service restructuring.
But as further spending cuts come forward, the NAO expressed a fear that over half of those authorities responsible for education and social care spending “are not well-placed to deliver their medium-term financial strategies”.
The next phase of managing cuts is likely to be more challenging, and may require dialogue with the public rather than behind-the-scenes fixing. Here are four options that councils might consider:
The first option is to ask citizens to pick up the tab through paying more in council tax – by holding a referendum if necessary and depending on whether the government raises the current limit of 4%. Liverpool’s mayor is interested in this option and is proposing a referendum for a 10% increase in council tax. A small number of councils tried this tactic in the late 1990s and early 2000s: Milton Keynes, Croydon (twice) and Bristol.
How did things work out? A report about how to undertake council tax consultation written at the time – and of which I was a co-author – identifies some positives: citizens were engaged by the referendums with turnouts equal to or higher than in local elections.
The lowest tax option was not always preferred, and the consultations generally had the effect of engaging sections of the public in a debate about public services. The biggest downside was the cost involved in running a referendum. Moreover, the political outcomes can be messy. If a consensus emerges for an increase it can help to build support for saving services, but if the result shows a divided locality, it can make decision-making even harder.
The second option is a product of the availability of new technology. Councils are trialling a budget simulator tool which offers a different form of consultation. The tool is interactive, people using it are forced to make tough choices, and they have a sense of the actual cash sums involved and the challenges facing local politicians and council officers. But participants can be channelled into an obvious “right” answer; the key decisions having already been made so citizens are merely endorsing them. And sitting at a screen ticking boxes is not mobilising or empowering. Why would the public want to join in this depressing exercise?
The third option is to find ways of bringing the resources and capacities of citizens into both the decision-making and implementation of service delivery; “co-production”,to use the jargon. This requires a council to be comfortable with giving up more control. But where it is willing to do so, it can be possible to construct a more deliberative, two-way dialogue with local people and organisations.
The ESRC research project Jam and Justice, based in Greater Manchester, is exploring how this can be done. Its pilot projects bring citizens and service providers together at both the neighbourhood and city-regional levels. For instance, by pooling their resources of local groups, health and social workers have shown they can help isolated older people in Stockport more effectively. Citizen organisations in other areas too are engaging in discussions about how to match more inclusive economic growth with more inclusive governance.
Here the engagement with citizens moves away from co-production and towards protest. Maybe Jeremy Corbyn-supporting activists in Labour areas will get into leadership positions and start to challenge (1980s-style) the need to balance budgets, and raise ideological objections to working with private or non-governmental providers? It is unclear, however, if Corbyn’s supporters have the sustained commitment or capacity for such action.
When, just a few weeks before the 2015 general election, the Conservative party announced that it would be introducing 30 hours of so-called free childcare for working parents in England – promptly overshadowing Labour’s own 25-hour pledge – parents rejoiced.
In a country where parents can spend more on childcare than they do on their mortgages, this offer was seen as a lifeline for many families. Unfortunately, the closer we get to the September 2017 rollout of the extended offer, the clearer it becomes that this policy has been rushed through, is ill thought out, and crucially, is massively underfunded.
Earlier this month the government published a disappointing response to the long-awaited consultation on early-years funding. Despite repeated warnings from the early-years sector that the 30-hour offer is not being properly financed, the Department for Education confirmed that it is ploughing ahead with its “ambitious” plans.
What makes this so frustrating is that the problem of early-years underfunding is not new. For years the amount that the government pays providers (nurseries, schools, pre-schools and childminders) to deliver early-years places hasn’t come close to covering the actual cost, meaning that providers lose money on every “free” hour they provide.
As it stands, all three- and four-year-olds, and the most disadvantaged 40% of two-year-olds, in England can receive 15 hours of government-funded early education and childcare a week, but independent research commissioned by the Pre-school Learning Alliance (PLA) in 2014 found that for every five children currently accessing funded places as part of the 15-hour offer, government funding only covers four.
So you can imagine our frustration when, instead of addressing this problem, the government – in a fit of pre-election pledge-making – decided to exacerbate it. A 2015 government review of the cost of delivering childcare places prompted a small increase in average funding rates, but nowhere near enough to plug the funding shortfall. In fact, in its consultation response the government confirmed that 20% of local areas will actually see their early-years funding decrease when the new funding rates come into effect in April 2017.
Worse still, the government has confirmed that these new funding rates – rates that so many have warned are insufficient – will be fixed until 2020, even as national minimum and living wages, mortgages, rents, utilities and other business costs inevitably rise. Last week the government admitted that it has no plans to formally review the costs of delivering childcare and early-years education.
In what world is this an acceptable approach to policymaking, especially for the delivery of a flagship manifesto pledge? The government cannot shut its eyes and hope this problem goes away. Without sufficient funding, we’re likely to see more and more early-years providers restricting the number of funded places they offer, if not opting out of the scheme completely in order to stay in business: and, consequently, more and more parents struggling to find a “free” place for their child.
The simple fact is that the 30-hour offer can only work if government funding actually covers the costs of delivering early-years places, something that the PLA’s Fair Future Funding campaign is calling on the government to ensure. This is not about asking for endless investment. It’s about the government committing itself to properly funding a pledge that it chose to make.
And it’s not about taxpayers paying for other people’s children to be looked after. It’s about investing in quality early education, just as we do for state-funded primary and secondary education.
Either the government can afford to fund this policy properly or it can’t – and if it can’t, it needs to come clean and admit that the childcare it is offering parents isn’t free after all, but merely subsidised.
This is a government that has talked a lot about life chances, about closing the gap and ensuring that all children get the best start in life. And yet, somehow we are in a situation where its childcare policy is falling apart at the seams, children’s centre closures are on the rise, and no one seems to be willing to admit there’s a problem.
If the government is truly committed to supporting children and families, its actions need to start matching its rhetoric.
The government is set to look at how to increase pensions saving for the self-employed and those with multiple jobs, as part of a review of its flagship auto-enrolment scheme.
Employees are now enrolled into pensions with their employer once they earn more than £10,000 a year, and unless they opt out they benefit from additional contributions to their pension.
Almost seven million people have been enrolled into pensions since the scheme began to be phased in in October 2012, and by 2018 the government expects 10 million people to be newly saving or saving more than previously.
However, the self-employed and those with multiple jobs each paying below the £10,000 threshold do not currently get enrolled. Pensions firm Aviva has estimated that as many as 10 million workers – employed and self-employed – are missing out on automatic enrolment because of the current rules.
Experts have warned that for the growing number of people working for themselves in low-paid jobs this could mean poverty in retirement.
Confirming a review of the auto-enrolment system, the pensions minister, Richard Harrington, said in a statement: “The main focus of the review will be to ensure that automatic enrolment continues to meet the needs of individual savers. In doing this we will look at the existing coverage of the policy and consider the needs of those not currently benefiting from automatic enrolment, for example employees with multiple jobs who do not meet the criteria for automatic enrolment in any of their jobs.”
He added: “I would also like to use the review to consider how the growing group of self-employed people can be helped to save for their retirement.”
The government said information from stakeholders across the industry would be gathered in the early part of 2017, and a report setting out recommendations published towards the end of the year.
Currently, employees who remain in a scheme are obliged to pay in 0.8% of their earnings, while their employer adds 1% and the government adds 0.2% through tax relief. These levels will rise in two stages, until from April 2019 onwards employees will pay in 4%, employers 3% and tax relief will add a further 1%.
Harrington said the government would gather evidence on whether current contribution rates were high enough, but did not expect to make policy decisions on that during the year.
He also confirmed that the trigger for auto-enrolment would stay at £10,000 from April 2017.
But Jackie Leiper, retirement planning expert at Scottish Widows, said that threshold meant many low-paid workers were locked out. She said research by the firm had found that twice as many women as men have two jobs but do not qualify for auto-enrolment.
“We believe automatic enrolment should be available to as many people as possible, and call on the government to reduce the threshold to the starting point of qualifying earnings – the band of earnings which are used to calculate automatic enrolment contributions – which is currently £5,824,” she said.
Leiper welcomed the focus on self-employed workers. “As the number of self-employed continues to grow significantly year-on-year, this is becoming a serious problem that must not be ignored,” she said. “We believe there should be more incentives for the self-employed to save, for example by making pension contributions deductible when calculating national insurance liability.”
Steve Webb, a former pensions minister and now director of policy at Royal London, said the plans for the review of automatic enrolment “deserve two cheers”.
“It is very welcome that the pensions crisis among the self-employed is to be considered, with new figures published today showing just one in seven self-employed people is saving in a pension. It is also good news that the review will look at other groups who are missing out,” he said.
“But the elephant in the room is the small amounts of money that are going in to these pension arrangements. Even by 2019 the minimum contribution rate will be just 8%, far below the required level for a decent retirement for most workers.”
Geoffrey Szuszkiewicz told his family he didn’t want anything for Christmas. But when he opened his stocking to find a roll of duct tape, some cling film and tin foil, he relented. “I was ecstatic. I could use everything,” he says
The 33-year-old dancer from Canada was in the middle of a “buy nothing” year when he opened his present, and had managed to cut out spending on anything except a pre-defined list of basic groceries and necessities for 12 months.
Szuszkiewicz is part of an anti-consumerist movement, known as minimalism or mindful consumerism, that has been sweeping across the globe via blogs, self-help books and social media. This move towards buying less often attracts new converts during the festive season when people balk at the scale of Christmas spending.
According to the Nationwide building society, people on average spend roughly half their monthly pay on Christmas. One in three, meanwhile, pay for Christmas using a credit card or overdraft.
Mark Boyle bought a smallholding in the west of Ireland with the proceeds of his book, The Moneyless Man, after spending three years living entirely without money. “I generally don’t spend anything at all at Christmas now – and I’m much, much happier,” he says.
“I didn’t buy or spend anything for those years – I’d grow or forage my food. Now I let people come and stay for free in my home, and run a moneyless pub. At Christmas, everyone from round here brings a bottle and we get together and have a shindig. For me, that’s what Christmas is about – meeting up and sharing food and drink. I avoid shopping at this time of the year in any way I can.”
Also among those who have embraced the more frugal lifestyle is financial journalist Michelle McGagh, who has been blogging about her “no-spend” year, and detailing the challenges and benefits of her new lifestyle. The savings she made helped her to pay off a substantial chunk of her mortgage. Last Christmas she spent just £14.53 on a meal for six people, did a “presents amnesty” with the adults in her family and made toy cars to give as gifts to her nephews.
Similarly, this Christmas will see Boyle make a few useful gifts for close friends and family out of wood, but he has stopped buying gifts completely and never receives any shop-bought presents. “There isn’t anything I need, even though I am supposedly living below the poverty line,” he says.
Like many minimalists he now values time over money. “I think the best gift you can give someone is time, when you are genuinely fully present. Step off the treadmill of rushing around earning money to pay for stuff and you find life goes much slower. I have so much more time now to do the things I love doing – and not just at Christmas, but all year-round. I feel liberated,” Boyle says.
Szuszkiewicz feels the same way. “You experience this huge release and liberation from cultural norms when you stop spending, especially at Christmas. I used to feel obligated to spend money I didn’t have on gifts I didn’t know whether my family needed or wanted. Now, everyone knows my policy is to not buy any gifts, so I no longer feel that obligation and I enjoy Christmas much more,” he said.
He is generous with his time instead, and during his “buy nothing” year made batches of chocolate, dried fruit and pickled vegetables which he gave to friends and family. “Consumables are great because they get eaten – and then they’re gone.”
Szuszkiewicz is currently using the £24,000 he saved over his no-spend year to travel around the world, and owns no possessions other than those he carries in his backpack. But he doesn’t want anything for Christmas.
“Physical things are literally a burden for me – and that’s not what Christmas means to me anymore. It’s about being with the people I love.”
He acknowledges that he makes a choice not to spend, rather than being forced into that position by circumstance. “But I think there’s nothing wrong with living this way, if you do have a choice. Why should you buy stuff that you don’t need to buy, just because you have more money to spend than other people?”
For people with children, the idea of an abstemious festive season might prove difficult. However, Sarah Koontz, a Christian writer from South Dakota who has two young children, says it teaches willpower. “Completing two no-spend Christmases taught me that it is OK to accept a gift from someone knowing that I cannot reciprocate, or that I’ve spent far less on them. Everyone is entitled to their own gift-giving strategy, and comparison is a trap I prefer to avoid,” she says.
She says that she has been called stingy – or even Scrooge – from time to time, but her convictions carried her through. “Our family is able to enjoy the traditions of Christmas more now that we have eliminated consumerism from the holiday. We still exchange small gifts, many of them homemade, but we have learned that true generosity requires more than a credit card. Spending less money on Christmas forced us to be generous with our time, energy, and talents. Those are the best gifts of all – because they are priceless.”
She is not alone in feeling this way. Sal Crosland, a 33-year-old holistic therapist from Huddersfield, writes the minimalist blog OneEmptyShelf.com. She has got rid of everything in her home she doesn’t need, and now focuses on giving experiences and making memories with her loved ones at Christmas.
“When I was doing my no-spend year and I thought back to past Christmases, I realised I couldn’t remember what I got, but I could remember where I was and who I was with,” she says. “Now, instead of stressing about buying presents, I place more importance on relaxation and family time and I look forward to Christmas much more.”
She always asks her family not to buy her anything for Christmas, and even when other people are given gifts in front of her she says she doesn’t feel like she is missing out. “I know it is my choice and my decision to opt out – and that makes all the difference.”
The act of cutting back on giving gifts at Christmas can be catching. Canadian blogger Cait Flanders went on a two-year-long shopping ban to try to pay off a Can$30,000 debt (£18,000), and in solidarity her family stopped exchanging gifts on Christmas Day. This year, even though the ban is over and the debt repaid, they have decided not to exchange gifts again. “It took so much pressure off everyone, and resulted in a much more meaningful holiday.”
Now she says that she would prefer to give someone a random gift on any other day of the year. “I hate feeling like I need to give gifts out of obligation.”
Regina Wong, founder of the Live Well With Less website, has similar motivations for reducing her spending at Christmas this year. “I have become uncomfortable with the highly commercial nature of Christmas and the general pressure and expectations of the season. I’m not against consumption – I’m just against mindless consumption, and consumption one can’t afford. I’ve realised I already have all I want or need.”
■ Tell people in advance that you won’t be buying gifts. “When I explained why I wasn’t spending at Christmas, the general reaction was relief,” Geoffrey Szuszkiewicz says. “People respected and understood my decision. If anyone doesn’t understand your reasons for cutting back, and still wants you to buy them something, I would recommend re-evaluating that relationship.”
■ Don’t underestimate your skills or the value of a homemade gift, says Mark Boyle, especially one that celebrates what you think is wonderful about the person you are giving it to. “Every single person alive has got some sort of skill or hobby they can use to give someone a gift or an experience. And I think there’s a lot more heart and soul in something you make yourself for another person, especially if it is something unique and distinctive that you think that particular person will like and need.”
■Remember that your presence can be a present too. “A kid might want a computer at Christmas - but is that going to be the deepest longing of that kid’s heart?” Boyle says. “At another level, perhaps without even knowing how to articulate it, what that kid may really want is a deeper connection to his or her parents through quality time. Try to understand the person you are giving to, and what they long for, instead of feeding an addiction to consumerism.”
Ministers are looking at increasing council tax to pay for social care but have been warned that it will not tackle funding problems which are “out of control”.
Experts, including the former Tory health secretary Stephen Dorrell, have warned of a growing cash crisis hitting local government and the NHS.
The government is preparing to allow tax precepts to be increased so local councils, which have suffered reductions in government grants totalling more than 40% since 2010, can claw in extra cash to cover the spiralling social care costs.
Izzi Seccombe, the Conservative chair of the Local Goverment Association’s community wellbeing board, confirmed that the idea of an increase in the precept was being considered.
“We have had some dialogue with ministers about this,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday.
But she said the money raised from such a move would not be enough. Seccombe pointed out a 2% increase in precept imposed by most councils last year raised only £380m, which was not enough to pay the £600m needed to cover increased staff costs under the “national living wage”.
She also warned that a rise in council tax would create a postcode lottery in services because richer areas could raise more than poorer areas where the need is greatest.
Seccombe called for emergency funding. “We need an injection now of £1.3bn because there is a shortfall by the end of 2020 of £2.6bn.”
Dorrell, who is now the chair of the NHS Confederation, said the shortfall in social care was spilling over into the NHS because discharged hospital patients had nowhere else to go.
He said: “What we are talking about is a cash shortage that is threatening the stability not just of local government but of the National Health Service. Unless we address this seriously, we will simply see a failure of service across the range of local public services and people will suffer as a consequence.
“It comes when people find they can’t have access to care homes, so they end up in A&E and GP surgeries. They can’t be discharged from hospital when they are fit and ready to go.”
Dorrell said he would welcome giving councils the flexibility to raise council tax for social care, but he called for a more “fundamental” rethink of both health and social care funding.
Martin Green, the chief executive of Care England, which represents care home providers, said hundreds of providers were on the brink of financial ruin.
He said: “Research recently showed 40% of care services will no longer be viable in the medium term so this is a huge number of care services that will be lost.
“The government needs to have a clear strategy on social care and if they don’t there will be a crisis right across both health and social care.”
Andrea Sutcliffe, the chief inspector for adult social care, told the Times: “The system is approaching a tipping point. We’ve got increased demand and potentially a restriction on capacity.
“Unless we really get to grips with some of these problems … we will get to an absolute crisis.”
Labour peer David Lipsey, who was involved in a royal commission on elderly care funding in the 1990s, added: “There could be mass closures of care homes.
“There’s a danger that poor people in poor areas will end up without care, living a squalid life. There could be care blackspots because the homes that are reliant on state funding will become unsustainable,” said Lord Lipsey.
The Lib Dem shadow secretary of state for health, Norman Lamb, said: “This is dreadful crisis management from the Conservatives.
“They are lurching from crisis to crisis and this is yet another desperate sticking plaster solution which falls short of what is needed. Making councils bear all the burden will increase the postcode lottery which already exists.
“It will mean that wealthy parts of the country will find it easier to meet rising demand whilst those areas where council tax raises less money will be left struggling.
“The government must be held to account for the consequences of leaving more and more people without the care they desperately need.”
Barbara Keeley, the shadow minister for social care, commenting on reports of proposed council tax rises to fund social care, said: “Asking taxpayers and councils to pick up the bill for the Tories’ failure is no substitute for a proper plan.
“It is time for Tory ministers to deal with the crisis they have created in funding social care and to develop a sustainable way of funding the social care on which vulnerable and frail older people depend.”
When “Marmitegate” broke in November, many small business owners may have felt the issues of a weakening pound had been a little over simplified. However, it was representative of what has been a tough year for British businesses trying to deal with rising costs in the midst of a dip in consumer confidence following the Brexit vote.
Not only have imported goods and services become more expensive as the pound has dropped in value, this year has also seen two major amendments to employment law. The national living wage became a legal requirement in April and currently stands at £7.20 an hour for staff aged 25 and over, rising to £7.50 from April 2017. At the same time, many SMEs are now required to contribute to workplace pensions. Business rates are also expected to rise for some in 2017.
It was this combination of extra staffing costs that prompted Samantha Coldbeck, owner of the Wharfedale convenience store in Hull, to look at till records and bills to figure out where her business could operate more efficiently.
“We saw we were taking a lot of money in our last hour of being open in the evening but when we examined the takings more closely, it was typically low-margin business, like people paying utility bills and topping up their mobile phones,” she says.
“In the early morning, though, we’d have a queue of people outside waiting for their breakfast and coffee, which has a far higher margin. So we made a simple decision. We now open the shop an hour earlier, at 5.30am, and close an hour earlier, at 9.30pm. We swapped a low-margin hour for a much higher-margin hour. We’ve managed to absorb a 6% rise in wage bill by increasing revenue by 8%.”
Nick Shanagher, managing director of Newtrade, a publisher in the independent retailer sector, says Coldbeck’s experience is typical. “Our research has shown many retailers are struggling to pass on rising costs, particularly with a rise in price-marked products,” he says. “So many are working harder at establishing what people want to buy and when so they can work more efficiently.”
It was not this year’s rise in staffing costs that had the biggest impact on optometrist Dhruvin Patel’s startup, Ocushield, which specialises in blue-tinted phone screen protectors that reduce eye strain. The fall in the pound meant the screens were around 20% more expensive to import from China.
Patel had to decide whether to pass on or absorb the additional cost. A little over a month ago, he decided the answer was to maintain prices but start charging for delivery, which he claims has not adversely affected sales. At the same time, he added blue-tinted spectacles to the company’s range – which have a higher profit margin.
“In a way, the weak pound has helped us grow faster. We were likely to move into glasses at some stage, but the rise in our import costs forced us to act earlier than anticipated,” says Patel.
“At the moment, the glasses are non-prescription and so are meant for people who don’t need glasses but work at a computer screen for much of the day. It’s moving us forwards, though, to the point where we will also start selling prescription blue-tinted glasses which will have an even higher margin for us. We think it’s only going to be a few months before most of our revenue comes from glasses rather than the screen protectors, so it’s been a positive move for us.”
The good news, then, is that rising costs can sometimes awaken a business to an area where resources could be better optimised or new opportunities grasped. But according to Bivek Sharma, head of small business accounting at business analysts KPMG, entrepreneurs need the right attitude.
“Cost increases are never welcome news but they can spark serious efficiencies in the long run,” he says. “Business owners rarely have time to look at costs, yet when price volatility takes a chunk out of margins, they are forced to examine their processes and look for leaner alternatives. The best approach is to take this opportunity to re-engineer the cost base rather than be tempted to clamp down on investments.”
It was while going through this process that Olly Culverhouse discovered a new business, almost by accident. He had found the cost of signing up new clients to his web development company, which is no longer operating, was getting out of hand. It was not just the paper, ink and stamps but the administration costs of staff drawing up, sending out and then chasing agreements each day. It made him ask his development team to come up with a digital means of agreeing contracts with clients and his Signable business was founded three years ago.
“Things were going well but we were facing increasing competition at the same time as it was costing us a few hundred pounds a month just to handle the paperwork,” Culverhouse says.
“So we developed an app so contracts could be signed digitally. Immediately clients loved it and started asking to use it for their customers. We were facing such tough competition in web development that it just seemed the right way to go. Within a year to 18 months, it was far more profitable than the web company we’d been running, so we let that run down.”
Against an economic backdrop which means few firms are willing to risk raising prices, despite staff and supplier cost going up, British SMEs can at least take solace that rising bills can sometimes be a blessing in disguise.
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
Fines imposed on banks and other City firms by the financial regulator have slumped to the lowest annual figure since the start of the financial crisis and less than 3% of last year’s total.
With a few working days left until the end of the year, the Financial Conduct Authority has dished out 23 fines worth £22.2m, down from 40 in 2015 when the total was £905m.
The total fell because blockbuster fines doled out in the past two years for banks’ rigging of foreign exchange markets and the benchmark Libor interest rate were not repeated. The FCA’s fines go to the Treasury, which has used them partly to fund worthy causes.
Aviva received the biggest fine of 2016 – £8.2m for lax oversight of an outsourcer looking after clients’ money. Aviva’s penalty was dwarfed by the £284m handed to Barclays last year for foreign exchange manipulation. That record fine was more than 10 times the total for 2016.
This year’s figure is the lowest since 2007, when the FCA’s predecessor, the Financial Services Authority, imposed £5.3m of fines. The annual bill increased to £22.7m in 2008 as the FSA responded to accusations of going soft on the City and rose each year to a peak of £1.5bn in 2014.
The slowdown in fines coincides with a turbulent period for the FCA that has left observers questioning its approach. Its former boss, Martin Wheatley, was forced out last year by the then chancellor George Osborne.
Wheatley’s uncompromising stance alienated the City. After banks waged a campaign for less aggressive regulation, Osborne declared after the 2015 election he wanted a more harmonious settlement with the financial industry.
Andrew Bailey, who took over as the FCA’s chief executive in July, said the drop-off in fines should not be read as a softening of the regulator’s approach.
Bailey said: “If we were to maintain the level that we had a few years ago, it would imply we were having something on the level of Libor and foreign exchange every year. If that happened, we would be asking ourselves: ‘What is going on?’ We would need a major blowup every year to maintain that level of activity and that isn’t our objective.”
When Osborne recruited Bailey from the Bank of England, where he ran its regulatory division for three years, banks hoped he would be less confrontational than Wheatley.
Peter Snowdon, a partner at the law firm Norton Rose Fulbright, said: “City firms think there has been a change in approach and that the new regime wants to be seen as less strident than the last one. Even taking into account the very large fines last year, that change is arguably reflected in the drop-off in fines.”
This year was also the first since 2007 that no UK bank was fined. The big four lenders – Lloyds, Royal Bank of Scotland, HSBC and Barclays – have paid out almost £1.4bn since 2007, peaking in 2014 when all four were penalised and their fines amounted to £659m. The banks have paid big fines for shoddy treatment of retail customers as well as for manipulating markets.
James Daley, the managing director of consumer group Fairer Finance, said: “The level of enforcement and fines we saw during the Wheatley era was probably about right and slowly we are seeing banks starting to slip back into bad habits. The sector has got miles to go before we can say it’s serving consumers well and the regulator has got as big a task as it had five years ago.”
The FCA has taken a tough line on some matters since Bailey took over. In August, it extended the deadline for claims for mis-sold payment protection insurance, increasing the likely cost to the banks. Last month, it proposed measures to increase competition between fund managers and it announced clampdowns last week on the spread-betting industry and crowdfunding.
Snowdon said: “Where they think they have identified inappropriate behaviour in the market, they are quite focused on it. Maybe they are shifting their emphasis to intervene earlier in the process rather than just fining people.”
The fall in fines could reduce the amount available to the chancellor for supporting good causes. In 2012, Osborne diverted fines, previously used to fund the FCA, to the Treasury and pledged to use the money for armed forces charities and the emergency services.
In last month’s autumn statement, Philip Hammond, Osborne’s replacement, said £102m of Libor fines would be used for good causes. The Treasury has received about £3bn from the FCA since the rule change. Any money not allocated for specific causes is used for general spending.
Amazon has been accused of creating “intolerable working conditions” after allegations that workers have been penalised for sick days and that some are camping near one of its warehouses to save money commuting to work.
Willie Rennie, the Liberal Democrat leader in Scotland, said Amazon should be “ashamed” that workers at its warehouse in Dunfermline have chosen to camp outside in the winter.
He made the comments after the the Courier newspaper published photographs of tents near the site that it said were being lived in by Amazon workers. It said at least three tents were pitched close to the warehouse by the M90 in Dunfermline and that a man living in one of them had said he was an employee who usually lives in Perth.
A Sunday Times investigation found that temporary workers at the warehouse were being penalised for taking time off sick and put under pressure to hit targets for picking orders. It also claimed that although workers could walk up to 10 miles a day doing their jobs, water dispensers were regularly empty.
Amazon has hired 20,000 agency workers for the peak Christmas season, more than doubling its workforce. Staff have to pay to catch an agency-provided bus to the Dunfermline site.
Rennie has repeatedly called for the firm to improve conditions at its Dunfermline site and said the latest claim “chimes with the feedback I have received from local people over a long period of time”.
He said: “It confirms that Amazon have created intolerable working conditions for many. The company don’t seem to be interested in keeping workers for too long as they work them until they drop. They have generated an oppressive culture where management and some workers put undue pressure on workers.
“It’s time for Amazon to finally change their ways. That means a change to wages and to working conditions.”
Rennie said the firm should be “ashamed that they pay their workers so little that they have to camp out in the dead of winter to make ends meet”.
Amazon, which has 12 fulfilment centres around the UK, has come under fire in the past for its treatment of workers, many of whom are employed through agencies. Three years ago, an undercover reporter for the Observer wrote about the long hours and physical work carried out for low pay, while more recently unions have claimed that workers are falling ill as a result.
Online job forums have reviews by former workers which describe being expected to “work like robots” and “paranoia with job security”. Workers say overtime is compulsory and holidays banned in the busy months of November and December.
When questioned about the tents, Amazon said it “provides a safe and positive workplace with competitive pay and benefits from day one”.
It added: “We are proud to have been able to create several thousand new permanent roles in our UK fulfilment centres over the last five years. One of the reasons we’ve been able to attract so many people to join us is that we offer great jobs and a positive work environment with opportunities for growth.
“We offer associates a range of roles in our fulfilment centres, depending on their preferences. Some roles involve walking a number of miles each day, a fact we make clear during the recruitment process. Many associates seek these positions as they enjoy the active nature of the work. There are many opportunities for people who prefer less active roles.
“As with nearly all companies, we expect a certain level of performance from our associates. Productivity targets are set objectively, based on previous performance levels achieved by our workforce.”
The company said it analysed wages every year to ensure they were competitive. All permanent and temporary Amazon workers start on £7.35 an hour or more and earn at least £11 an hour for overtime. There are paid 30-minute lunch breaks and subsidised meals. The new national living wage is £7.20 for workers aged over 25.
Water is readily available for staff as they performed their duties, Amazon said, and it has a “fair and predictable system to record staff attendance and take into account individual circumstances”.
Michael Newman, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said that it was legal for companies to have a policy which meant that workers were effectively penalised if they were off sick. “Absence policies are definitely becoming stricter – one example would be having a bonus or ‘attendance allowance’ that is then forfeited if the worker is off sick,” he said.
“Amazon’s policy doesn’t seem particularly unusual though – the important thing is to distinguish between days off, and periods of absence. It is usually the latter that counts for unfair dismissal purposes, although many policies look at both how long you are off for, and how many times you are off.”
The Labour MP Frank Field, who has been campaigning against poor conditions for self-employed workers, said the government-ordered review into working practices should issue an interim report.
“Inquiries take time but over that time the injustices are growing,” he said. “There have been reports on Hermes and Uber done by my office, and now the Sunday Times investigation – there is enough information out there.”
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I am a salaried solicitor in my late 40s employed at a medium-sized firm. I was recruited to build and run a department 10 years ago. By 2010, we were a team of six. One of the people I recruited, who is younger, indicated he wanted a managerial role. Three years later the firm decided to appoint him team leader after I indicated I was fed up managing (which involved tedious administrative work), and he showed enthusiasm to step in.
In exchange for this I was offered a small performance-related bonus as an incentive to generate fees. Three years later, the firm announced this employee has been made a salaried partner on the basis of his managerial contribution. I now feel overlooked and under-appreciated. Although I no longer have a managerial role, I generate twice as much income as the team leader, have been in the company twice as long and am much older. It feels more hurtful as I was involved in recruiting this person in the first place. I am also more dedicated to clients.
I know that I am seen as quiet and compliant by nature, and it is true that I tend not to make a fuss. I am not looking for prestige, but I do like to feel wanted and appreciated. Instead, I feel humiliated, but it feels petty to complain.
Although I like my job and get on well with the rest of my team (including the team leader) and the salary is OK, I feel ill at ease because of this issue. Should I swallow my pride and soldier on, or raise the issue with the management?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
Can you help with a long-running saga I’ve been having with parcel delivery company Yodel? The problem started because our letterbox is in our back door. Royal Mail and some couriers know this, but unfortunately Yodel could only be bothered stuffing its card in a cellar vent under our front door. It stuck two cards in before we even realised they were there.
I rearranged the delivery, but we were out again and were rewarded with another card in the vent. At no point did it occur to the driver that there wasn’t a letterbox in this door and that we might struggle to get other post in there. Yodel’s phone line is useless as it only allows you to book another delivery.
As we have had “three valid attempts” to deliver (though I don’t consider any of them valid as it failed to find the letterbox) it now wants me to collect the parcel myself. What is most frustrating is that I’ve complained on Twitter and all that has achieved is a long chain of direct messages, where someone promises they will deliver the next day, but then I hear nothing more for a couple of days. My Amazon account shows the status of my order as having been delivered, but there isn’t even an option to tell it that it hasn’t shown up. JM, Hebden Bridge, Yorkshire
The Christmas rush means a whopping 390m parcels will be handled by Royal Mail and other parcel companies between November and December. Inevitably, the increased volume means things sometimes go wrong.
Yodel is an independent parcel carrier handling more than 155m parcels a year and has an 8% share of the UK parcel market. It checked its records and said that a fourth delivery had been successful, but that was only thanks to a kindly neighbour who took the item in for you. “We’re pleased to confirm that JM has received his parcel,” Yodel told us.
In future, it may be worth putting a sign on your front door pointing couriers in the right direction. However, what this case highlights is how parcel companies set up their phone lines to deal with problems. This week Citizens Advice said that online shoppers will typically spend two and a half hours sorting out a delivery problem this Christmas because an item is late, turns up broken or doesn’t arrive at all.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Increasing council tax bills to cover the social care funding black hole will increase the postcode lottery in provision, Theresa May was warned amid speculation she will back steep rises in the levy.
Experts have issued fresh warnings that the straining system could “topple over at any moment” leaving the poorest “living a squalid life”.
The prime minister is reportedly preparing to allow tax precepts to be increased so local councils, which have suffered reductions in government grants totalling more than 40% since 2010, can claw in extra cash to cover the spiralling social care costs.
Martin Green, chief executive of Care England, which represents care home providers, told the Times: “The whole thing could topple over at any moment and those who are poor and vulnerable will suffer most.”
Andrea Sutcliffe, the chief inspector for adult social care, told the newspaper: “The system is approaching a tipping point. We’ve got increased demand and potentially a restriction on capacity.
“Unless we really get to grips with some of these problems … we will get to an absolute crisis.”
Labour’s Lord Lipsey, who was involved in a royal commission on elderly care funding in the 1990s, added: “There could be mass closures of care homes.
“There’s a danger that poor people in poor areas will end up without care, living a squalid life. There could be care black spots because the homes that are reliant on state funding will become unsustainable.”
Former chancellor George Osborne introduced a 2% precept to pay for care for the elderly and disabled.
Town halls have warned that even if every council imposed the maximum extra levy, social care would still face a funding gap of at least £2.6bn by 2020.
The Lib Dem shadow secretary of state for health, Norman Lamb, said: “This is dreadful crisis management from the Conservatives.
“They are lurching from crisis to crisis and this is yet another desperate sticking plaster solution which falls short of what is needed. Making councils bear all the burden will increase the postcode lottery which already exists.
“It will mean that wealthy parts of the country will find it easier to meet rising demand whilst those areas where council tax raises less money will be left struggling.
“The government must be held to account for the consequences of leaving more and more people without the care they desperately need.”
Asking prices for properties in the UK will rise by 2% in 2017, although sellers in inner London will be asking less as the bubble “continues to deflate”, property website Rightmove has predicted.
Sellers entering the market over the past month have priced properties 2.1% lower than those putting homes up for sale the previous month, at an average of £299,159, but Rightmove said it expected next year to be a seventh consecutive year of rising prices.
Despite uncertainty over the UK’s decision to leave the EU and stretched affordability, new asking prices are 3.4% higher than in December 2015, and the firm said it expected high demand to continue to lift prices.
Miles Shipside, Rightmove director, said: “There was a bout of jitters with the unexpected referendum result, albeit now seemingly short-lived, but more may arrive after article 50 is invoked.
“For the time being any nervousness is being overridden by high demand for the short supply of suitable homes for sale in the lower and middle market in many parts of the country.”
However, in inner London, Rightmove has forecast a 5% fall in asking prices. In some boroughs, there have been double-digit falls over the past year. In Camden, Rightmove said homes coming on to the market over the past month were typically 17.7% cheaper than in December 2015, at an average of just under £1m.
Separate figures from estate agency Countrywide show that rents in London fell by 0.7% in the 12 months to November, the biggest annual fall since October 2010. Although rents in Greater London are still much higher than in the rest of Britain, averaging £1,298 a month against £809, Countrywide said the gap had reduced since 2015, from 62% to 60%.
It said the fall had been driven by a surge in the number of rental homes available in the capital, with the number of properties up by 32% year on year while the number of tenants increased by 9%. During the month, asking rents were cut on 11% of London homes.
For would-be buyers, getting on the housing ladder is made harder by a failure to build enough homes to meet demand. Research by thinktank Civitas has found that net housing supply in England was only enough to meet 80% of the annual projected growth in the number of households for this parliament, and 90% of the growth by 2039. In London, the supply of housing is running at a rate that will provide just 55% of the homes that are needed to cater for new households over the long term, and in 14 of the capital’s 33 boroughs the rate is below half. In Haringey, north London, the rate of building is just 12% of expected household growth.
Daniel Bentley, editorial director at Civitas, said: “This shortfall is not only pushing up prices but stymying the household growth we would otherwise expect to see – as more youngsters live with their parents or enter house-share arrangements – and creating homelessness.”
Communities may be split between those who can pay for ‘higher level’ of energy reliability and those living ‘in the dark’
Britain is facing the prospect of an energy supply crisis which will see customers having to pay for a higher level of reliability, it has been reported.
Andrew Wright, a senior partner with energy watchdog Ofgem, is quoted as having warned that communities could be split between those who can afford to keep the lights on and those who cannot.
According to the Telegraph, he said there was much less flexibility for suppliers because Britain had lost fuel capacity due to the closure of coal mines.
Wright said: “In the future, not everyone will be able to use as much electricity as they want and there will be a need to rewrite the rules.
“We are currently all paying broadly the same price but we could be moving away from that and there will be some new features in the market which may see some choose to pay for a higher level of reliability.
“One household may be sitting with their lights on, charging their Tesla electric car, while someone else will be sitting in the dark.”
An Ofgem spokeswoman said Wright was speaking in a private capacity at a conference.
She said: “Ofgem is fully committed to delivering secure supplies for all consumers now and in the future. This is our number one priority. This is why we have driven up network reliability standards and worked closely with government to ensure secure energy supplies.
“In order to protect consumers, every regulator has to look a possible future challenges. Mr Wright was talking at a university conference in a personal capacity and looking at possible issues that might or might not arise in 10 to 15 years’ time.”
I am at the end of my tether with Thomson Holidays. My two sons and I had a lovely week-long all-in holiday with the company in Cape Verde in July. The package cost me about £2,200.
Unfortunately, the flight home was cancelled. There was terrible customer service from the reps in the hotel and while waiting for the plane the next day, resulting in us arriving home almost 24 hours late.
I had no sun cream or toiletries left as we had donated everything to the charity Thomson supports. So my kids and I had a difficult afternoon trying to stay out of the sun to avoid burning, but with no room to go to. One of my sons ended up with sunstroke.
I lost a day’s holiday from work and the children missed a football course they had booked. I emailed my complaint on 4 August. According to Thomson’s website, a flight delay should be investigated and responded to within 56 days. After hearing nothing, more than 70 days later, I posted a letter. It responded by email to say it would give me an answer within 28 days. That has come and gone, and still nothing.
In the meantime I posted on its Facebook page and immediately got a response telling me that it was being sorted. That was more than 30 days ago. Still nothing.
As I write, it is 110 days after I submitted my complaint. You pay a lot to have a relaxing holiday, but as soon as there is a problem there is appalling customer service with a couldn’t-care-less attitude. B da S, Newcastle-upon-Tyne
This was poor customer service, particularly from a major player like Thomson, and a shame that this blighted an otherwise enjoyable holiday.
As you note, Thomson has a legal obligation to investigate and respond to flight delays on this scale under EU regulations that came into force in 2015. The company also requests that holidaymakers notify it of any problems that have not been resolved through the Thomson representative on site – again, disappointing in your case – within 28 days of returning from holiday.
The company told us: “Thomson Airways would like to apologise to B da S for the time it took to process her compensation claim. Like all airlines we operate a fair and thorough process to handle delay compensation claims, in line with EU regulations, and we can confirm that we have contacted the customer directly and the situation is now resolved. We would like to reassure customers that we do everything possible to minimise delays and are committed to maintaining excellent on-time performance across our flying programme.”
The company promised you a full refund of the flights element of your package – that’s £1,620 (€600 per person) within 21 to 28 days.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Take a walk along City Road in St Paul’s today, the area of Bristol that gained notoriety following serious riots in the 1980s, and the fried chicken joints and mini-markets give way to something less expected: estate agent signs bearing the message “Sold”.
The property website Zoopla has included St Paul’s alongside two other Bristol neighbourhoods in its Top 10 Hipster Hotspots Across the UK – the areas to have seen the biggest growth in property prices over the last five years. Something, apparently, has changed.
“I remember in the 90s when people were scared to go into St Paul’s,” says Oona Goldsworthy, chief executive of the United Communities housing association. “Now we’ve got houses just off Portland Square and it’s crazy what’s going on. It’s a bonanza.”
According to the report, property in St Paul’s has gone up by 38.5% over five years to reach an average price of £261,300. With its proximity to the city centre, decent transport and grand Georgian town houses, St Paul’s is succumbing to the forces that have transformed the other two areas on the list, Montpelier and Stokes Croft.
For the local newspaper, the news has confirmed all its worst suspicions. “It’s official,” declared the headline in the Bristol Post. “Hipsters are to blame for soaring house prices in Bristol.” The paper went on to state that, “All three areas are now dominated by men wearing beards and women riding bikes complete with the mandatory wicker basket on the handlebars.”
While the Montpelier district, with offerings such as the gin, cheese and cake emporium Cox & Baloney, has long been established as a gem of gentrification, Stokes Croft is a more recent addition. Described by one local as a concept rather than a place, Stokes Croft is little more than a single street, its decidedly humdrum collection of high street shops and takeaways transformed in recent years by the arrival of popup artisan bakeries, disco barbers and eateries bearing names such as the Love Inn and Kale & Kettle. The property prices match the fare: Montpelier has seen a 39.9% rise to an average of £494,158 over the last five years, while in Stokes Croft properties have gone up by 37.1% to an average of £317,800.
Like many in St Paul’s and the wider city, Goldsworthy’s organisation is struggling to cope with the impact of gentrification on an area that has a strong sense of community. “Just because an area becomes successful it doesn’t mean poor people can’t live there once it gets an artisan pop-up bakery,” she says. “We’ve never had artisan bakeries before but now we have, property developers have noticed and moved in.”
One such developer, Gary Sheppard from Helm Construction, told the Post that credit should be given to the hipsters. “These districts had been rundown, neglected and avoided since they began to decline after the [second world] war. No other agency had managed to stem that decline. But the hipster generation has succeeded in bringing the life back to previously deserted streets.”
The hipsters, of course, are people too: many are students who have graduated from Bristol’s booming universities and simply chosen to stay in the city, while others are young professionals escaping London’s high prices – and bringing them to Bristol. For Adam Cantwell-Corn, a coordinator of the Bristol Cable media co-op, “hipster bashing is obscuring the real causes and culprits behind the housing crisis”.
He shows me the site of the Chocolate Factory, a relic that has been the subject of a fierce battle between residents, developers and the city council. The Chocolate Factory is in Easton, where the appearance of organic cafes and groceries in the modest terraced streets marks it out, Cantwell-Corn says, as “the thin end of the wedge of what we know to be gentrification”.
Back in St Paul’s, Aileen Edwards stands in her second-floor office in Brunswick Square and points to a recently developed building on the other side of the square. Spick and span, and rather tasteful, it offers a blend of office space and residential living close to both the retail expanse of Cabot Circus shopping centre and the boho dreamland of Stokes Croft. It is an offer that Second Step, the homelessness charity Edwards runs, would never be able to match.
“I don’t know how long we’ll be able to afford to stay here,” she says. “This area is changing, there’s no doubt about that. Inequality is increasing, the private sector is buoyant because of the gentrification and affluence but it’s having a terrible effect. People are finding it harder and harder to get social housing or private sector rents that are affordable, so they are being pushed out to the margins of the city. With gentrification you lose the personality of the place.”
As the city council’s cabinet member for homes and communities, Councillor Paul Smith has helped set up a gentrification commission, an initiative of the city’s new mayor, Marvin Rees.
“It isn’t the fault of the gentrifiers but of the housing market,” says Smith. “People want to live in St Paul’s to be part of a diverse community, but that community moves out. When I was young St Paul’s was seen as an Afro-Caribbean area largely, although it was always a majority white working-class area. It is still a very mixed community but it is changing. The council blocks anchor it a bit. If they weren’t there you could see it gentrifying much quicker.”
Rees, who spent part of his childhood in St Paul’s, addressed the dangers of gentrification in his state of the city speech in October. “Our fundamental challenge is that while Bristol is getting wealthier, inequality is increasing and the city becoming ever more unaffordable,” he said. “Affordable housing is also an element in the tough challenge to ensure gentrification does not inexorably change the look and feel of our city and reduce its diversity.”
Amirah Cole is vice-chair of the Malcolm X community centre in St Paul’s, set up after the 1980 riots. There is a sense that she feels the organisation’s sense of purpose is dissolving as the community it was formed to serve disappears.
“A community centre should serve its local community,” she says. “So if it’s not doing that because the community isn’t interested, you have to ask what its purpose is. Most people now think only about themselves, and that’s the whole thing about gentrification, destroying communities. I guess it’s social cleansing.”
In a cafe on Cheltenham Road, opposite a Tesco Express that was the scene of the last riot in the area, in 2011, the woman serving coffee at the counter calls to three young men seated on pews at one of the wooden tables. “Guys, you’re washing’s ready,” she says.
Rachel Walker takes a break from distributing coffee and laundry at the At the Well Cafe & Launderette, one of the quirkier examples of gentrification in the area. “I’m at the forefront of gentrification,” she says. Walker was living in St Paul’s, paying £430 per month for a share of a four-bedroom house, but had to move out because she couldn’t afford the rent.
“It was very St Paulsy,” she says. “There were council buildings either side, there were lots of drugs and drunks, but it didn’t feel dangerous, just surreal. It’s central, it’s interesting, I love the cross-cultural aspect of it all. There are beautiful houses that could easily become a Notting Hill-like area. It feels like everyone in the entire country knows that Bristol is a nice place to live. The secret’s out. It’s an alternative to London.”
1780s The Georgian townhouses and squares of St Paul’s are built – but it never attains the fashionable status of Clifton.
1948 After wartime bombing, housing is cheap and the Windrush generation of immigrants move in.
1968 The first St Paul’s Carnival. It grows to rival Notting Hill as a celebration of black culture.
1980 After a police raid on a cafe, social tensions erupt in the St Paul’s riot.
1999 Banksy’s Mild Mild West mural appears on Stokes Croft, next to St Paul’s. There were plans to cover it in glass to protect it from vandals, but it is now maintained by local activists.
Our careers expert – and you the readers – advise an HR worker wanting to branch out, and someone passed over for a job
The amount of tax owed by many buy-to-let landlords will double or even triple as a result of changes being phased in from April, it was claimed this week. Some landlords enjoying four-figure net annual profits could end up nursing losses – and if interest rates rise this will make the situation even tighter.
It was in July 2015 that George Osborne mounted a surprise raid on mortgage tax breaks. He announced a cut in tax relief on mortgage interest payments for buy-to-let landlords, with the changes phased in gradually between April 2017 and April 2020.
So what’s happening?
 At the moment, landlords can deduct mortgage interest and other finance-related costs from their rental income before calculating their tax liability. But this interest relief is being slashed from 100% to zero.
What will happen instead is that the income tax on someone’s property profits and any other income sources will be totted up, and then they will be granted a “tax credit” worth 20% of the mortgage interest cost to offset against income tax, whatever rate of tax they pay.
Some experts have claimed this tax change, which might sound arcane and is made extra-complicated because it is being phased in, will have a devastating impact on many landlords’ finances. It only affects individuals who own rental properties in their own names.
How many people does it affect?
 It’s difficult to come up with a comprehensive figure because every landlord’s circumstances will be different.
The Treasury says HM Revenue & Customs has estimated that “only one in five landlords will pay more tax as a result of this measure”. However, organisations representing landlords have rubbished this claim.
What is a fact is that by inflating people’s taxable profits, the change will inevitably push some people into a higher tax bracket, without them earning a single penny in extra income.
The National Landlords Association says its research has shown that 44% of current basic rate tax-paying landlords say the changes will push them into a higher tax bracket.
There could be unpleasant knock-on implications for some people. For example, it might mean that some landlords with children will be dragged into the “high income child benefit charge” regime, where child benefit is clawed back via the tax system if a parent has an income of more than £50,000.
Give me an example of how it will work
 The table below shows how the tax change might work in practice. It tracks what could happen between now and April 2020 when the new rules will be fully in place. The table has been put together by Anna Sofat, who runs financial services boutique Addidi Wealth, and it is based on a higher-rate taxpayer who buys a £350,000 property with a £280,000 mortgage that has an interest rate of 3.5%. This example assumes a rental yield of 4%.
For the sake of simplicity, our Mr/Ms Example’s net rental income (£12,600 a year) and the mortgage interest they have to pay each year (£9,800) have been kept the same throughout.
As the table shows, landlords can currently offset all mortgage interest payments against rental income, but this is gradually being reduced – ie, to 75% in 2017-18, 50% in 2018-19 and so on. As can be seen, that change whacks up the taxable profit massively: from £2,800 now to £12,600 in 2020-21. The 20% tax credit which is then applied cuts a bit off the bill, but not enough to stop it from shooting up from £1,120 in the current tax year to £3,080 in 2020-21.
That in turn means Mr/Ms Example’s net profit after tax takes a big tumble, falling from a current £1,680 a year to a £280 loss in 2020-21.
However, this is arguably too upbeat in that it doesn’t factor in the upfront costs of acquiring the property, including the new higher stamp duty on buy-to-lets. Addidi Wealth says it is reasonable to deduct £975 a year from the annual net profit to reflect these costs, and once you do that the losses get a lot worse a lot more quickly.
If the mortgage is on a variable rate, a rise in interest rates would further eat into profits. If we assume the mortgage interest rate gradually rises from 3.5% to 4.5%, that would also result in a thumping loss, as shown in the table.
“This example provides insight into a previously profitable venture that becomes loss-making, that will need to be bailed out down the line, either by higher rental yields or large property price rises, neither of which are certain,” says Sofat of her table.
HMRC has put together its own worked examples. They include “John”, who has a self-employment income of £35,000 a year, plus rental income from property of £18,000 a year. His mortgage interest is £8,000 per year. HMRC says John’s 2016-17 income tax bill is £6,400, and his total income for tax purposes is £43,000, which means he is just below – by £1 – the 40% higher-rate tax bracket. But in 2020-21 it all looks very different, despite the fact that the amount of income John is getting hasn’t changed a jot. 
HMRC says that because there is a zero deduction for his £8,000 mortgage interest, his total income for tax purposes in 2020-21 leaps to £51,000. The 20% tax credit is then applied, but John will still end up with a 2020-21 income tax bill of £8,000 – ie, £1,600 higher than in 2016-17. Also, John is now a higher-rate taxpayer, and if he or his partner is claiming child benefit, he will be hit by the high income child benefit charge because his total income is now more than £50,000.
Tough affordability rules for buy-to-let mortgages that take effect on 1 January mean the figures will no longer stack up for many wannabe landlords, writes Rupert Jones.
The new tests will in some cases massively reduce the amounts landlords can borrow. For example, someone who would currently qualify for a £190,000 buy-to-let mortgage could find themselves limited to £150,000 under the new regime. Many of those who find themselves in this situation would probably have to abandon their plans because they wouldn’t be able to find the extra cash for a much bigger deposit, or whack up the rent by enough to bridge the gap.
The clampdown on affordability, which is separate to the tax increases on buy-to-let properties, is designed to ensure that borrowers could cope in the event of a chunky rise in interest rates. The Bank of England has previously expressed concern about the landlord mortgages sector, saying that buy-to-let borrowers “may be more vulnerable than owner-occupiers to an unexpected rise in interest rates or a fall in income”. Its big fear is that if there were a mass sale of buy-to-let properties, this could undermine financial stability.
As a result, governor Mark Carney toughened up the “stress test” that buy-to-let mortgage applicants must undergo. From 1 January, lenders will have to check that an applicant could still afford their mortgage if interest rates shot up to 5.5%. However, this particular stress test will not apply if the customer is taking out a mortgage fixed for five or more years, so perhaps we will see a bigger take-up of such deals.
While this requirement does not formally take effect until next month, many lenders have already introduced tougher criteria. Buy-to-let lenders have traditionally required applicants to prove that the rent they receive is equal to at least 125% of the mortgage repayments, but in addition to bringing in the higher ­interest rate stress test early, many lenders have also started insisting that the rent must cover 145% of the mortgage payments.
For example, on 23 November Santander changed its rules so that the 5.5% stress test rate applied, and the rental cover figure was upped from 125% to 145%. It was followed this week by Virgin Money, which also moved to 5.5% and 145%. Nationwide’s buy-to-let division, the Mortgage Works, switched from 125% to 145% rental cover back in May, and is raising its stress test rate, currently either 4.99% or 5.49%, to 5.5% on 19 December. Meanwhile, Leeds building society said it will move from 125% to 140% rental cover, plus the 5.5%, on 1 January.
Some lenders, including the Mortgage Works, have also used this as an opportunity to reduce their maximum loan to value – in its case from 80% to 75%. In other words, it is now demanding a minimum 25% deposit in addition to all the other requirements.
So how will the changes affect landlords? It’s best illustrated with an example (courtesy of brokers London & Country). Let’s take the example of a property generating £1,000 in rent a month. At present, using a 5% interest rate figure and a 125% rental cover figure, a landlord could borrow £192,000. But once you increase those figures to 5.5% and 145% respectively, the amount the landlord could borrow tumbles to £150,470.
Another way of looking at it is that, still using that first set of figures, a landlord wanting to borrow £150,000 would need to receive rent of £781 per month. But when you change to 5.5% and 145%, the monthly rent required shoots up to £997.
“The tightening in lending criteria, to ensure there is no slip in lending standards, will mean that landlords require a higher rent to support the borrowing,” says David Hollingworth of L&C. “This should give them better ability to deal with changes in costs, and the stress test is designed to account for interest rates rising in the future. However, there’s a sense that the pressure hitting landlords from different angles, and all at once, will put upward pressure on rents.”
The Bank of England has said that in order to avoid existing borrowers being adversely affected when remortgaging, the new rules won’t apply to buy-to-let remortgages where there is no additional borrowing beyond the amount outstanding under the existing contract.
Landlords are creating limited companies in a bid to avoid higher taxes on their rental incomes when new rules on mortgage interest come in in April, writes Hilary Osborne.
Research from lender Kent Reliance found that 100,000 limited company loans were taken out in the first nine months of the year, more than double the figure for 2015. Meanwhile the Residential Landlords Association said 40% of its members had considered changing their status, but that 80% of those had decided it was not the best thing to do.
Michael Wright, director at property tax specialist RITA4Rent, said his firm had seen a large number of landlords asking for advice on whether to hold their properties in a limited company rather than in their own name. 
Holding a property in a company means a different set of tax rules. Instead of paying income tax on the rent, the money goes into the company which is then liable for corporation tax. The rate is currently 20%, but by 2020 that will drop to 17%. For a 40% taxpayer, or someone on the highest rate of 45%, this could mean a big saving, although a company does not receive a personal allowance before tax kicks in. Mortgage interest and finance costs are considered allowable expenses inside a company, so landlords can then offset them against their rental income.
Lenders have cottoned on to the trend and are increasingly willing to offer mortgages on this basis. Ray Boulger of broker Charcol says: “A year ago you would have had relatively little choice of lender and you would’ve had to pay more. Now, several lenders are charging the same rate. Some charge a higher fee, but if that’s £500 it is not much compared with the savings you will make.”
Setting up the company is inexpensive, with online services charging less than £100 to do the basic work. But while the process is straightforward, deciding whether it is the right thing to do is not. First, says Wright, landlords need to consider whether it is worth transferring any existing properties. “A company is a separate legal entity, so if you want to move a property into one you have to sell it to it – this may attract the new higher rate of stamp duty and, depending on how much the property has increased in value, could trigger a capital gains tax bill.” For landlords who have seen big growth in the value of their properties, this expense could offset the benefits of the move.
Some landlords will opt to only use a company for any new properties they buy, but if they want to take an income they may find themselves liable for tax on dividends. Wright adds a cautionary note to landlords who do go down this route. “We can’t rule out the government launching an attack on landlords holding properties in a company – they may one day say, ‘Why are two homes on the same street both being rented out and taxed differently?’” he says.
Stuart Law of Asssetz Property adds: “On paper incorporation looks like a great idea. However, when it comes to the practicalities we’re not sure landlords will do it. The cost of transferring properties means that for many it is simply not worthwhile. For new purchases though, it can be worthwhile.”
Kent Reliance says there will be other measures landlords could take to mitigate the impact of the tax changes:
• A third of landlords said they planned to increase rents in the next six months, by an average of 5.4% (or £571 a year). This will mean paying more tax too, and landlords may find that the market will not bear any more increases. 
• Transferring ownership would allow landlords to avoid tipping their incomes into the 40% tax bracket. But if the property is mortgaged it could result in a stamp duty bill, which is based on the share of the mortgage that is transferred. There could also be a CGT bill.
I live in a city and am looking to move closer to family in a more rural part of the country, although with access to larger towns and cities. I have worked in human resources for around 10 years, mainly in the private sector, and while I enjoy the job I am looking for a potential change of direction when I move home, perhaps with the ability to either work more flexibly or for myself.
I am a HR generalist, but particularly enjoy the areas where I can interact with people and help them with their careers. I enjoy recruitment and selection and often help friends and families, giving advice on their CVs and applying for jobs. I enjoy training people and engagement activities. I am less keen on the more “traditional” aspects of the job, such as dealing with discipline and grievance issues.
However, I do enjoy the application of policies where it means providing advice and support to managers and individuals. I also understand people well and enjoy helping them to understand situations and the motivations of others.
I am now unsure of where I can best utilise my skills, and am also very aware of the perception of HR people when it comes to applying for roles in different areas. I’m not sure people outside of the profession would always recognise the key skills I would bring.
I have managed people in the past and have considered whether using my skills to manage a team in a different area would be a solution, but I’m not sure what role I would have the experience for.
I have also considered roles such as careers advice, but am reluctant to make a move to the public sector. What would you and your readers advise?
When people are thinking of making a change to their working lives, it’s quite understandable that they begin by thinking along traditional lines: of existing organisations, job descriptions, work sectors and so on. But what has become ever more possible over the past 20 years or so, thanks almost entirely to the internet, is that rather than searching for an existing role into which they can fit, individuals can construct their own tailor-made job description designed around their own skills, interests, needs and location, and go it alone. Because this is still a relatively new concept, and because there’s no commonly accepted name for it, it can seem strange and highly risky. It needn’t be.
So much in your letter suggests to me that you should forget “HR” as a professional label for yourself. Try writing a sort of advertisement for yourself in which, as objectively as possible, you list the ways in which you as a person can help others: in formulating their ambitions, in helping to construct their CVs, in preparing them for interviews, or coping with promotion and so on. Also list details of your years of experience that qualify you to provide such help and advice.
Becoming self-employed is certainly a big and slightly scary move to make, but I think you’ll find, when you read the “advertisement” you’ve written for yourself, that you have a great deal to offer a great many people.
How you make yourself known depends a bit on where you live, but if you’re going to be within easy access of several towns and cities, that could be ideal. Start a blog so you begin to make a name for yourself online. Join any suitable voluntary groups that already exist. Consider using local newspapers.
You’ll need great perseverance and there will be moments when you’ll feel ready to give up. But there’s every chance you could build yourself the perfect made-to-measure job.
• How about starting your own employment agency? You can work for both sides (employer and prospective employee) in both sides of recruitment. As for the training bit, you can offer job seekers who sign up with you bonus sessions on CV writing, interview skills etc. coffeeisgood
• How does recruitment grab you? You probably need a bit of a sales mentality to enjoy it, but your HR background could be put to good use. MinorSwing
• You could try some agency HR roles when you move. These might be short-term contracts and would give you a foot in the door of various companies. You could build up contacts for possible freelance work. Another area which might appeal is teaching HR courses at further education colleges. ID5279121
After many years working for the same large company in a technical capacity on a small team, the management has finally formalised my job spec and advertised the role. I applied for it along with a more junior colleague.
Although I have vast experience and have been doing this job for nearly 30 years, the post was given to my colleague. There are lots of possible reasons – he is cheaper, toes the line (unlike me), perhaps interviewed better (no surprise, as this was my first interview for 30 years!).
I get on very well with my colleague and do not begrudge him the job one bit, but I am in a dilemma. He regularly comes to me for help and advice as he does not have my technical experience. How do I proceed now he has been promoted above me? Do I say “Sorry but I can no longer offer the help I have in the past”, or do I continue to help him and simply lump the fact that he is getting remuneration off my back?
The fact that you get on well with this younger colleague, who is now your superior, makes most things possible. He’s probably as uneasy about this as you are, particularly since he still needs to come to you for advice. I would pick a moment, maybe out of the office over a drink or a coffee, and say that you don’t feel sore that he got the job and you didn’t, and that you are certainly happy to go on giving him help and advice. However, you would like your additional contribution formally recognised, so would he be prepared to support your application for a pay rise? It’s very unlikely that he would refuse.
• If you can lump it with a good grace, do so. If you are unable to do that, leave. At all costs, do not hang around becoming a bitter grouch, gnawing at the old bones of resentment. donotpassgo
• If you don’t toe the line you will not be seen as management material. It sounds as though you recognise this, so your only option is to bite the bullet and continue to help your colleague. Failure to continue with this would only be seen as pettiness. A fresh start might be your best option. fairshares
• What will happen is that when you have spent time training him up and he is confident in the role he will sack you. Start valuing yourself. oconnor_m2000
• Do the right thing – support him. If you’re perceived as being bitter about it, you’re the one who will come off worse. Plus, it’s not his fault. Though if he’s any sense, he’ll give you a (respectfully) wide berth for a while. Bokanal
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
We live in a big old Victorian house, but on a low income. We turn radiators off in rooms we don’t use. Now a friend says it’s a false economy, risking damp and making the whole house cold. Should we turn them back on, or do you have any other tips?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
When James Hewson’s Land Rover Defender broke down in north Wales, he was thankful that he had cover with the RAC, knowing that it would most likely do a professional job. But Hewson says the breakdown service managed to lose the keys, temporarily lose the car, and cause more than £6,000-worth of damage.
The first blow to Hewson was finding out he did not have full RAC recovery cover as part of a policy he bought from insurer NFU Mutual. Instead, it only allowed for the car to be towed a few miles. If he wanted the vehicle, which is 20 years old but still robust, taken to his trusted north London specialist garage it would cost £513 – a hefty amount for Hewson, who uses the 12-seater to take groups of disadvantaged inner-city kids on adventure trips with his charity, Mountainwise. Hewson, a trained climbing instructor, says: “In the end it was easier to pay the RAC to take it back to our garage where I knew it would be sorted out properly.”
But the nightmare was only just beginning. The RAC’s recovery contractor managed to lose the keys. And then, as it was being transferred across the country, it was winched on to a recovery truck which ripped the chassis.
The alarm bells started ringing when he got a call from the RAC asking if he had a spare set of keys – which he did not. Next he got a call from his garage asking why there was a Jeep in its yard. In an almost comedic element to the saga, the RAC had towed in a Jeep Cherokee for repair, instead of Hewson’s Land Rover.
When his vehicle finally arrived, he says it was immediately clear to staff that it had sustained major damage to the chassis, and he was quoted £6,600 to fix it, not including the cost of replacing the locks. “It might be old, but these go on for ever if you look after them. They are perfect for us as they go anywhere and carry lots of people. We take the kids all over the place. This is one of our best and we need it back.”
When Hewson complained to the RAC he was astounded when it offered just 20% of the repair bill. This was later upped to 30% and a “final” 50%, that would leave the charity more than £3,000 out of pocket. It offered to replace the locks and refund the £513 recovery fee, but no more. During the three-month dispute the vehicle has remained undrivable. “As far as I am concerned it has wrecked our car and it should fix it. To only offer half is ridiculous,” Hewson told us.
In correspondence to Hewson the RAC said: “The damage to the chassis was caused by the last driver who recovered your vehicle from our base to the garage. As the keys had been lost, he attached the winch to a hook on your vehicle which was the wrong procedure. I’ve highlighted this incident to the recovery driver’s manager and this will be addressed as a training issue.”
Hewson said it appeared to be limiting its payout by claiming there was already damage to the chassis. “Their loss adjuster only inspected the vehicle after the damage, so they have no grounds to suggest that the chassis was already damaged. None of this was noted on the pre-recovery condition report and if there was a pre-existing problem it would have failed its MOT, which it hadn’t.”
However, when we put Hewson’s case to the RAC this week it suddenly decided to pay up. It told us: “We accept there were mistakes made in terms of losing keys to the vehicle and in the damage caused to the rear section of the chassis while our colleagues attempted a recovery, which was felt to be the right course of action at the time.
“Following further review of Mr Hewson’s case, and in recognition of the length of time it has taken to resolve this issue, the RAC has decided to settle the claim, in full, and will be contacting the customer to confirm this.”
Last month the RAC was featured on the BBC Watchdog programme after viewers complained of being wrongly told they needed a new battery by recovery staff. It called the RAC out to 10 staged breakdowns in which their experts had declared that the battery simply needed to be recharged, and the car run for a while.
In eight cases the RAC insisted that a new battery was required, at prices of £90 or more. Experts checked the batteries again and claimed they saw no reason why the RAC had said they needed to be replaced. The RAC told Watchdog that it used the latest testing technology and it stood by its staff’s actions.
In 2014 Guardian Money first highlighted the high cost of RAC batteries, running several letters from readers who claimed they had been over-charged – on top of the membership fees they were already paying.
The RAC was bought by private equity firm Carlyle for £1bn in 2011.
The Bank of England governor told us this week there has been a “lost decade” of wage growth. But is the truth really a lot worse than that?
By chance it was the same week my 90-year-old father decided to show me his carefully filed tax returns from the 1960s (yes, that’s what counts for fun in the Collinson household). In 1963-64 his pay as an accounts clerk in London was £1,357 a year. In today’s money that equals a little over £25,000 a year once inflation is taken into account.
In some ways that £25,000 doesn’t look so great. After all, someone working in a similar role with his level of experience at the time might expect £35,000-£40,000 today. But then look at what an income of £25,000 bought in 1963 in London.
He had already been able to buy a new-build three-bed semi on the edge of the city, in Rise Park, Romford, and was paying the mortgage. His wife was at home looking after the expanding family of five. He also had a car – a Ford Popular – and a Philips television. Everything was paid for from his earned income, with almost nothing from inheritances. But holidays were infrequent, mostly to relatives and friends, and never abroad.
His granddaughter now works in the same city, London, for the same pay, £25,000. But what does an income of £25,000 buy you in 2016? The chances of owning a house are unimaginable. Her income affords a room in an ex-council flatshare in a mouldy bit of south London. She has just given up her car as she can no longer justify the cost. She manages to keep ahead of the bills every month, but only just.
Houses in Rise Park, Romford, now sell for £400,000 to £450,000, or nearly 200 times the £2,400 my father paid when his home was built in 1956. Back then he had to pay a 10% deposit, or £240, equal to a fifth of his annual wage. His granddaughter would today have to find £40,000 to £50,000, or twice her annual gross pay. Yet another unimaginable prospect.
Now let’s take the mortgage. Halifax says that for a £400,000 loan the minimum salary is £84,000 a year. In other words, a young Londoner today would have to triple their pay to enjoy the same lifestyle as someone 53 years ago.
Tax is crucial. My father’s 1963-64 tax return shows income tax paid of just £28 and 14 shillings (£28.70). In other words, his effective tax rate was just 2.1%. This was largely because in the early 1960s the tax allowances given to parents with children were, relatively speaking, huge. Today his granddaughter suffers far more from “stoppages” than someone in the 1960s. Her take-home pay is around £1,600 a month after income tax and national insurance, not helped by the £53 a month deduction to cover her student loan. Her effective tax rate is around 23%.
That said, she’s just back from a weekend with friends in Budapest – but cheap Ryanair getaways are hardly a substitute for housing. Nor is the fact she has an iPhone, when my father in 1963 would walk to the end of the street to use a telephone box.
Economic growth since the 1960s has been real, but the link between growth and personal prosperity has broken down, probably since the 1990s. We can carry on pushing for increases in GDP, but it’s meaningless unless it translates into a recovery in living standards. If any government really wants to help the left-behinds, then cutting house prices and rents must be their first priority.
Rob Hill is angry that his tax bill will go up £3,000 from April. Chris Cooper is furious that his personal tax bill will nearly double. Other landlords say that their effective tax bill will rise to 100%. As the buy-to-let market reels from last April’s stamp duty hike, and awaits the tightening of lending criteria starting in January and the steep increase in tax being phased in from next April, is the party over for Britain’s two million landlords?
Hill has three rental properties in south-west London, but says landlords are “getting a bashing” from the government’s changes to the tax regime, accusing it of ruining the retirement plans of thousands of people. An estate agent himself, he has let out a flat and two houses in Clapham for the past 10 years, which earn him an annual rental income of £40,813 after service charges and letting fees. The mortgages cost him £13,770, leaving him with a profit of £27,042. Currently he is liable for 40% tax on this, so the bill is £10,816.
But from April the government will begin to withdraw the tax relief landlords currently enjoy. At the moment, buy-to-let investors can offset all the mortgage interest against their tax bill, but this will be reduced in stages between 2017 and 2020, cutting the relief rate from 40% to a flat rate of 20%. (The full details and worked examples are explained on the next page.)
For Hill, it means he will be taxed at 40% on his turnover of £40,813, which comes to £16,325. Then he applies the 20% basic-rate tax relief of £2,754, which will bring his tax bill to £13,571 – nearly £3,000 more than in this tax year.
But with relatively small mortgages, Hill admits he’s in a better situation than many. He cites an investor who recently bought a flat in Soho for £985,000 through his estate agency, with a £650,000 mortgage. The landlord makes a profit of just £3,343 a year on the deal, but by 2020-21 will be making an annual loss of £554 – and that’s before the boiler breaks down or there’s a void period.
“There’s a housing shortage, and landlords help this by providing accommodation – but they are being vilified,” Hill says. “Interest rates will go up at some point, and that will be the final nail in the coffin – many will have to sell. The government is penalising landlords at a time when confidence in the pensions system is at an all-time low. Many people put money in buy to let instead and now the goalposts are being moved drastically. In what other business can you not write off a fixed cost against tax?”
But the tax change is just one of three blows to landlords: since April, anyone buying a home that is not their main residence has had to pay a 3% stamp duty surcharge – for a £200,000 buy to let in England and Wales it meant the tax jumped from £1,500 to £7,500. And from 1 January, tough new affordability criteria imposed by the Bank of England means borrowers will be limited to smaller loans (see overleaf). Someone who previously qualified for a buy-to-let mortgage of £190,000 might find they can only borrow £150,000 in future.
Tenants who see themselves as toiling to pay their landlord’s pension, however, may see it another way. As Reuben Young of campaign group PricedOut says (see below), the changes are “fantastic news” and will level the playing field for first-time buyers competing for homes with landlords.
But critics warn the clampdown may force up rents – and argue that they are not all fat cats. Cooper, 55 and from Windsor, is a landlord with 15 properties across the country, from Crawley in the south to Grimsby in the north. On paper he appears to be a millionaire, with the properties worth a total of £2.4m. But Cooper works as cabin crew on an airline earning £34,000 a year, and says he began doing buy to let to supplement his otherwise meagre pension.
His total rental income is £104,000 a year, but mortgage interest and charges are £88,000, leaving him with an annual profit of £16,000. Added to his pay it brings his annual income to £50,000. Currently he pays £12,320 tax and national insurance on that, but once the tax changes are fully phased in by 2020 his bill will rise to £22,720. Figures prepared by his accountant suggest the tax on his rental income will rise from £4,600 (or 29% of his profits) to £14,900, or 93% of his profits. If interest rates rise he says he will have to pay tax in excess of his profits.
Cooper is already increasing rents. Until now, he says, he has kept rents on his properties at around £500 a month when he could have charged market rates of around £550 because he wanted to attract good, long-term tenants. But now he says it is likely he will have to raise rents to above the market average to protect himself from the tax rises. The alternative would be to sell up, with many landlords weighing up the cost of the annual tax increases against the capital gains tax liability if they “crystalise” their property profits and sell up.
“I think a perfect storm is brewing in the rental market,” says Cooper. “There isn’t enough property being built of any tenure in the UK. Landlords will either have to raise rents or sell because of the tax rises. If they sell, their tenants will have to leave. But then there will be less rental property around, so rents for other places will rise. It’s supply and demand.”
Cooper was one of a group of landlords so enraged by the changes that they took their case to court. But the Axe the Tenant Tax group, represented by Cherie Booth QC, lost the case, and hopes of a reprieve in the autumn statement from new chancellor Philip Hammond were dashed.
Instead, many landlords are scrambling to restructure their properties into corporate vehicles to avoid the tax. The Buy to Let Britain report from Kent Reliance last week found that some landlords have set up limited companies, while others have transferred properties to family members. In the first nine months of this year, it said, 100,000 limited company loans were taken out by landlords buying properties – double the number for the whole of 2015. Over the page we detail how this works.
But according to Cooper, despite the high-profile court case, many buy-to-let investors are still unaware of the forthcoming changes. “A lot of landlords are sleepwalking into disaster,” he says.
Last week, my aunt got a phone call from my mum. “I’m destitute,” she said. “I have to sell my house as soon as possible or I’ll be left with nothing.” This came as no surprise.
My mum’s spending habits have been a cause of family concern for years – a source of tension, worry and, eventually, the elephant in the room that none of us had the energy to tackle head-on. Her financial situation is probably quite common. And I am certain some of you reading this will recognise yourselves in her story.
Mum is an intelligent woman with a university degree, who worked in a profession that brought in a very good salary for more than 30 years. My childhood was comfortable. We lived in a nice house in the country, ate out a lot, went shopping on Saturdays and bought things without hesitation. I certainly never had any suspicion that we were anything other than financially secure. Now, though, my mum’s financial CV makes a shocking read.
She has no real assets. Any equity in her house has been borrowed against several times and, because her current job is part-time and doesn’t pay very much, lenders have refused to extend her mortgage. She has to sell her house within the next few weeks, but will only have a very small amount of equity left to buy another. Her options are limited and depressing. She has no pension.
Over the years, I have made excuses for each of her financial missteps. She was a single parent, which no doubt put her under immense pressure and she could not have predicted or prepared for the recession. She also made some investments that went badly wrong – again, something she could not have predicted. But in recent years, as I have managed my own finances, I have examined the situation with a little more cynicism, largely because my spending habits are so similar to hers. And that terrifies me.
Mum took a career break in her 50s for health reasons, and I fully supported her finding a job that came with less stress. But while a sensible person would understand that a reduction in income means outgoings have to decrease too, I don’t think this occurred to Mum. I think she recognised it on some level – a level once removed – but couldn’t see how it would apply practically to her life.
To this day, she buys the most expensive dog food there is, and regularly splashes out on costly haircuts. Because she has always done these things; they are as commonplace and basic to her as having a shower in the morning.
The thing is, I want her to have those things. I know they make her feel human and normal. I appreciate the huge wrench it would be to give them up. And I can see how sacrificing them would be such an emotional price to pay, that she just … doesn’t.
Luckily, I am also able to grasp how unbelievably misguided her approach is. But, in all honesty, without my mum as a cautionary tale, I could see myself repeating the same patterns.
Here are just some of the ways my financial genes manifest themselves:
There are certain things I don’t automatically associate with costing money – heating, for, example. Keeping my home at a constant ambient temperature is something I am used to and expect. “Spoilt!”, I hear you cry, and you would be absolutely right.
Then there is the fact that I manage to justify spending in my head. I can turn any purchase from a frivolity into a necessity. New shoes – we all need shoes. An expensive present for a friend – I want to show them how special they are.
I once watched my mother buy three winter coats in one go. “I need different colours and styles for work,” she said, making it sound so sensible.
To me, money equals convenience. I rarely spend time looking for a better or cheaper deal – after all, money is affording me the luxury of saving time.
Like Mum, I don’t want to be reminded of my frivolity. I’m not in debt, but I am guilty of putting a “naughty” purchase on my credit card, so I get all the pleasure of the new item without the visual reminder of a depleted current account.
“I didn’t realise just how bad things were,” my mum told my aunt during their phone call. Which leads me to believe she has been hiding her debts from herself, too.
When I do manage to save, it feels nice to see the amount in my savings account increasing. But when I have to dip into it – for a car repair or unexpected bill – the upward struggle of saving suddenly seems pointless. So I’ll spend a little more, get the bug again and the numbers quickly start to snowball.
Last year, when Mum’s financial situation must already have been dire, she spent thousands of pounds on the house. Admittedly, it is nice, but had she shopped around, she could have achieved the effects for half the price. She didn’t tell me until after the work was complete, correctly predicting I would have been furious.
Later, she justified the spending by saying it would add value to the house. Incorrect, according to the local estate agent. In fact, it makes the house a less attractive proposition for developers.
Ultimately, she wanted to make the changes and was able to rationalise it.
It is easy to see how attitudes to money are passed down through generations. They are like any other attitude or habit. I don’t remember ever having a conversation about saving money when I was younger. In fact, the concept of showing a bit of self-control to reap financial reward in the future has only been hammered home to me in recent years by my husband. And, by God, it has taken a lot of hammering.
As well as nurture, nature has its part to play too. A recent scientific study revealed that our spending and saving habits do come from our parents. Twins who grew up separately showed identical patterns of spending and saving, and while social and environmental factors do influence how we treat money, this influence declines over time. Apparently by the age of 40, it is all down to genetics. Hopefully, I have enough time to break my spending habits and rewire my financial brain.
Seeing my mum so reduced, so diminished, not just financially but mentally, is heartbreaking. Worst of all, we don’t talk about it. There is so much shame and anger attached.
I am angry that Mum didn’t heed warnings or accept the help that has been offered – numerous times. And because I know that until she takes responsibility, no new pattern can emerge, maybe there is worse to come.
And Mum is angry because she has nothing to show for her efforts. The sum total of her life, of her living, is so small. She still can’t quite understand how she has got to the place she is in. Or why.
The instant gratification of her spending has always been fleeting; she probably doesn’t even know where all the money went. It just did, like some magic trick that leaves you scratching your head.
I often think, if I just won a few thousand pounds, that would fix everything. But that’s how I know that I still have a long way to go in my battle against my repeating my financial heritage. The reality is that a wedge of money might paper over some cracks, but, like a gas filling the space it is in, I would spend what I had and the same problems would crop up.
It will be a continued struggle to keep my attitude to money in the black, but I am determined to do it. After all, I have seen first hand that financial security is priceless.
Some details have been changed
You can shop till you drop if you live in one of these properties, located in Essex, Wiltshire and Leeds
This 2020 sq ft penthouse is a five-minute walk from the new Victoria Gate shopping centre, which includes the largest John Lewis outside London. No need to commute – it has an in-house office. But there are just two bedrooms and the only outside space is the twin parking lots. Asking price: £650,000. Rightmove 0113 451 3360
Ryanair has told lawyers acting for a woman claiming compensation that it will no longer accept the jurisdiction of the English courts, in a case that has raised concerns over air passenger delay rights.
Every year thousands of UK passengers file legal claims against airlines in the UK courts, seeking compensation they believe they are owed under the EU delay rules.
Lawyers acting for a woman known only as Ms Menditta, who claimed against the Dublin-based Ryanair after a delay in 2015, have been told by the airline that a clause in the airline’s terms and conditions requires disputes to be decided by the Irish courts.
In April, Liverpool county court will hear Menditta’s case against Ryanair, but the airline will argue the claim must be brought in Ireland. If the court agrees, all Ryanair passengers could be forced to go through the Irish courts to chase denied compensation.
Nicholas Parkinson, a panel solicitor for the flight compensation firmFlightDelays.co.uk, who brought the claim on the passenger’s behalf, said the case could have huge ramifications for all air passengers if Ryanair is successful.
“If passengers were only able to bring a claim using Irish solicitors in the Irish courts, the vast majority of passengers living outside the Republic of Ireland will probably not bother to bring a claim at all – especially bearing in mind that most claims against Ryanair are only worth between £210 and £350. To our knowledge no other reputable airlines have a similar clause in their terms and conditions or, if there are, they do not attempt to rely on this clause.”
It is the latest in a series of legal challenges airlines have mounted against the EU rules that require them to compensate passengers for significant delays or cancellations, and overbooking.
Passengers can claim €125-€600 (£105-£500), depending on the event and length of the flight, in their country of origin. The airlines are exempt from having to pay out in certain circumstances – such as strikes and bad weather – but have fought a number of failed test cases to avoid other circumstances, particularly technical problems.
Kevin Clarke, a flight delay lawyer at Bott & Co solicitors, said this case could represent the biggest threat so far to the rights of passengers under regulation EC 261/2004. “If Ryanair were to win, this could allow all airlines to select any country within which passengers must bring their claim. There would be nothing stopping UK airlines from stipulating the country in which court proceedings must be commenced in their terms and conditions – meaning UK passengers would need to find a solicitor in Lithuania or Lebanon, or wherever else the airline chooses.”
Ryanair, which flew 117 million passengers last year, said it requires customers to submit flight disruption claims directly to it before engaging third party “claims chasers”.
“Claims chasers don’t like our terms and conditions, because they are designed solely to protect our customers, and ensure they receive 100% of the compensation they are due.”
Last year the Civil Aviation Authority began enforcement action against Ryanair to make it pay compensation to thousands of delayed passengers after a European court of justice judgment. At the time the CAA said it was not satisfied with the way the airline was handling compensation claims for disruption caused by routine technical faults.
What’s going for it? Britain’s gatehouse, thanks to Brexit, may be about to resume the role it has held for a millennium or two. The past few decades have not been kind to Dover: bombed to smithereens in the second world war, rebuilt – vigorously, if we’re being generous – in the 1960s and on its uppers since airports and the Channel tunnel snatched away its historic role. Maybe the future will be kinder. The hefty chunks of the past that have survived hint at a more prosperous incarnation: the castle, of course, none sturdier in the country, and the beautiful Regency terraces along the waterfront. Combined with its dramatic geography, squished into a cleft where the North Downs hammer into the sea, this should make for a spirited town, as impressive as its famous white cliffs, our “glittering breastplate”, as Carol Ann Duffy called them. What it needs is attention, money and a new confidence.
The case against An air of despondency from years of being overlooked. How will Dover respond to Brexit? Customs strikes and 14-hour queues this year are a worrying augury. The waterfront needs serious work. Will the St James retail park, opening next year, liven things up?
Well connected? Very. Hourly trains to St Pancras (67 mins), hour/half-hourly to Charing Cross (2 hrs) and Victoria (2 hrs); half-hourly to Canterbury (25 mins); three an hour to Folkestone (14 mins) and Ashford (30 mins). Driving: 30 mins to Canterbury or Ashford, 20 to Folkestone and the M20.
Schools Primaries: among many good, says Ofsted, White Cliffs and River are “outstanding”. Secondaries: selective; Dover Grammar for Boys, Duke of York’s Royal Military, and Dover Grammar for Girls “outstanding”.
Hang out at… The Allotment, the local saviour for the past few years, is under new ownership.
Where to buy Castle Ward, on and off Maison Dieu Road. Pretty Castle Street hints at Dover’s civilised past, as do the amazing Regency town houses on much of the front. For suburbans, look to Temple Ewell, River and Kearsney. Large detacheds and town houses, £400,000-£900,000. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £250,000-£400,000. Semis, £130,000-£400,000. Terraces and cottages, £120,000-£250,000. Flats, £70,000-£200,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £450-£550pcm; a three-bed house, £650-£850pcm.
Bargain of the week They’re all bargains here. Take this vast Regency town house on East Cliff, needing restoration, at £299,000, with Thomas & Partners.
Diederik Smet “It’s on the up, with lots of development. Wonderful green spaces nearby, including cycle and walking routes. Gorgeous architecture, if you look up.”
Justine Wingate “Follies, a great new independent pizzeria, and Cullins Yard in the marina for good food and live music.”
• Live in Dover? Join the debate below.
Do you live in Scarborough? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 13 December.
The number of people doing jobs in London’s gig economy has increased by almost three-quarters since 2010, according to research by thinktank the New Economics Foundation.
Analysis by the group found that the number of people working for themselves in the capital in the transport and storage sector had increased from 38,000 in 2010 to about 65,300 in 2016.
Recent years have seen a boom in app-based taxi and delivery services, such as Uber and Deliveroo, which are operated by technology firms and use self-employed couriers and drivers.
The thinktank said it believed it was this type of casual employment that was behind the huge increase in the number of “non-employing businesses” that the Office for National Statistics had recorded in the sector.
These are businesses that do not employ anyone other than the owner, and would include most people working in the gig economy, the group said.
Across the UK as a whole, the number of non-employing businesses was up by 28% over the period studied, but in London’s transport sector it increased by 72%.
The New Economics Foundation said the growing gig economy meant thousands more people had been left without the security of a regular wage, a pension or full employment rights.
“Rather than the blooming of a thousand flowers, as the digital economy was supposed to encourage, we have seen the emergence of extremely powerful tech giants whose business model is to achieve market dominance and then reap the rewards,” it added.
Stephen Devlin, the senior economist who did the analysis, said: “There are many advantages to the working lifestyles offered by Uber and Deliveroo, but too much power now rests in a handful of platform companies. Workers are seeing their wages squeezed and hard-won employment securities eroded.”
In October, an employment tribunal found that drivers for Uber should be classed as workers and given extra rights, but the case is going to appeal. A separate case has been heard against courier firm CitySprint, although no ruling has yet been made, and recently workers for Deliveroo requested union recognition.
The government has commissioned a report into workers’ rights and practices from Matthew Taylor, who worked for Tony Blair before heading the Royal Society of Arts.
Devlin said: “There’s no reason we can’t have flexibility for workers as well as strong employment rights.”
Paramedics are set for pay rises worth at least £4,400 from the Department of Health and NHS Employers amid trade unions’ concerns that their members were not being paid properly for their life-saving work.
About 12,000 of the health workers – who are trained in emergency medical care and first aid, but not to the level of a qualified doctor – will be affected by the agreement, which will increase starting salaries from £21,909 to £26,302.
Under the terms of the deal, most paramedics, including ambulance crews, will move up the pay scale. However, union leaders have warned that the change may not be enough to staunch a steady drain of workers leaving the ambulance service.
While Christina McAnea, the Unison union’s head of health, backed the new pay deal, she added: “The banding issue alone may not solve the drain of paramedics from the ambulance service, but it will certainly make it a little easier for trusts to hold on to experienced staff.”
The pay rise comes as the UK faces a critical shortage of paramedics, which has left at least one trust paying £30 an hour for agency staff – almost double the rate given to staff workers – and another seeking permission from immigration officials to poach 250 workers from Australia and New Zealand.
Paramedics have reported working under tremendous pressure as a result of increasing demand and a healthcare system battered by cuts. Many say they continue working well past the end of their 12-hour shifts, and rarely get meal breaks. At the end of 2015, a survey of 3,200 paramedics, commissioned by the GMB, Unison and Unite unions, found that three-quarters said they were planning to quit the NHS.
The DoH said the deal had been the result of several years’ negotiation between government officials and unions to thrash out how best to recruit and retain ambulance staff. It goes hand in hand with plans to modernise the role of paramedics, including expectations that they will carry out more treatment at the scene of emergencies, and take patients to medical centres other than hospitals, a spokesman said.
He added that 2,200 more paramedics had been recruited since 2010, and the number of training contracts had been increased by 60%.
Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, said: “In recognition of their increased responsibilities, we have agreed to look at rebanding around 12,000 paramedics where their job description matches the requirements of the new band six profile, moving them up the pay scale and making sure we are able to better recruit and retain paramedics in the future to ensure patients will continue to get the very best care.”
Sharon Holder, national officer of the GMB general trade union, said: “GMB has campaigned for many years to ensure all ambulance staff receive fair pay. This agreement is a step in the right direction.
“The GMB is pleased the Department of Health has finally realised paramedics need to be paid properly.”
Abdurzak Hadi has worked as a minicab driver for 10 years, and as an Uber driver in London for nearly three. He came to the UK as a child refugee from Somalia in 1992 and now has a young family but is struggling to support them. 
His low pay is, like that of many Uber drivers, topped up by the state with working tax credits. His 10-year-old son has been receiving treatment for leukaemia and he hoped that being an Uber driver would allow him the flexibility to arrange his work around hospital appointments and collecting his other children from school, sharing the caring with his wife, but he says the reality has been very different.
Hadi regularly works about 40 hours a week for Uber. He says most of the drivers he knows work much longer hours to make ends meet but his children’s needs prevent him from doing so. Last week, after paying Uber 20% commission, he earned £557 before costs for a full working week; some weeks it has been much less. Newer drivers have 25% deducted.
He estimates that the costs for hiring his vehicle, paying public hire vehicle insurance, fuel, his licence fees, car cleaning and phone hire are about £285 a week, so his hourly earnings fell below the statutory “national living wage” of £7.20 an hour, if it applied.
In his previous job he could ask the operator to give him local jobs when he needed to come to the end of a shift, but he says he is unable to do that with Uber because he is penalised by being logged out if he turns down jobs that are too far away. “If I am self-employed I ought to be able to take jobs I want or not, but you don’t even know where the passenger is going.”
Hadi is one of 19 drivers who took Uber to an employment tribunal, which ruled that they were not self-employed, but workers entitled to basic rights, including the national living wage. Uber is appealing against the decision.
Although he has worked for different operators in the past, he says they have been undercut by Uber so are no longer recruiting, and he has nowhere else to go.
“At the beginning the money was really good because fares were higher but now they have cut them and flooded the market. Sometimes I have to wait well over an hour for a job. It’s taxpayers like you who are funding Uber at the moment because we are not earning enough and having to go to the government to ask for benefits.”
Uber treats its drivers as Victorian-style “sweated labour”, with some taking home less than the minimum wage, according to a report into its working conditions based on the testimony of dozens of drivers.
Drivers at the taxi-hailing app company reported feeling forced to work extremely long hours, sometimes more than 70 a week, just to make a basic living, said Frank Field, the Labour MP and chair of the work and pensions committee.
Field received testimony from 83 drivers who said they often took home significantly less than the “national living wage” after paying their running costs. The report says they described conditions that matched the Victorian definition of sweated labour: “when earnings were barely sufficient to sustain existence, hours of labour were such as to make lives of workers periods of ceaseless toil; and conditions were injurious to the health of workers and dangerous to the public”.
Although Uber classifies its drivers as self-employed, which puts them outside minimum wage legislation, Field said that in reality they had almost no independence – Uber dictates their working patterns once they have logged on, has raised its commission while cutting the rates they can charge, and imposes lockouts from its system if drivers turn down too many jobs. This, combined with the cost of the vehicles needed to meet Uber’s requirements, is creating “chronically low pay” and insecurity, the report says.
Field said he had produced the report, Sweated Labour, Uber and the “Gig” Economy, because he was concerned that the bottom was falling out of the labour market. It follows his highly critical examination of working practices at the courier company Hermes.
He said ordinary taxpayers were suffering because companies in the gig economy, where people do predominantly short-term, casual work, were failing to carry a fair share of the risks of business. “This is what has blown a hole in the government’s projections for tax revenue. The more workers are pushed into low-paid, insecure self-employment, the less will be the tax take for the rest of the country. The Uber report shows that this form of self-employment is not confined to Hermes, but is a driving force in the wider gig economy.”
Uber said it did not believe the cases in Field’s report were representative. It said recent polling had shown that nine in 10 of its drivers were satisfied with the money they made and enjoyed being able to balance work and family life.
“We’re proud of the economic opportunities we have created for people who can choose to drive when and where they want. Drivers using our app made average payments of more than £16 an hour after Uber’s service fee this September,” the company said in a statement.
It said most of its drivers worked less than 40 hours a week on its platform, with only about 25% logged in for more than that. It urged any driver who was making “below average payments to get in touch so that it could advise on better car and insurance deals and best times and places to drive”.
The report, written with Field’s parliamentary researcher Andrew Forsey, says Uber has flooded the market with new drivers, increasing competition for passengers so drivers are forced to work longer and longer just to maintain their low earnings.
Those who have taken on debt to finance their vehicles feel trapped and have little choice but to work unsafe hours to service their loans and feed their families, it says. The number of private hire drivers licensed by Transport for London (TfL) has almost doubled in six years, from 59,000 in 2010 to more than 116,000 by December this year. Uber says around 40,000 drivers work for its platform in the UK, with about 30,000 of those in the capital.
One driver told Field: “Yesterday my hourly net income fell to £2 an hour. I made £40 cash, then had to put in £30 in petrol.” Another described his work as being so low paid he received working tax credits from the state despite working very long hours. “The fares are too low and the commission too high. Drivers work six and a half days and 16 hours a day – dangerous for the driver, passenger and the public. Often you will earn less than the minimum wage, so you work more hours.”
Field is calling for TfL and the Department for Transport to require Uber to banish “sweated labour” from its working practices before renewing its licence to operate when it ends in 2017. He also wants the government to reform employment law so that companies in the gig economy are required to give workers basic protections, including the national living wage.
Uber was founded in 2009 in San Francisco and has expanded rapidly across the world since. Consumers love its low fares and convenience but it has attracted controversy in many of the cities where it operates, being banned in some, and provoking protests and legal challenges in others.
In London, a group of 19 Uber drivers took the company to an employment tribunal earlier this year with the help of the GMB union, arguing that they were not genuinely self-employed and were entitled to workers’ rights, including the national living wage. The court ruled in favour of the drivers in October but Uber said it would appeal against the decision. Employment law currently requires individual workers to bring their own cases rather than the ruling being automatically applied to other drivers.
Yaseen Aslam, the founder of United Private Hire Drivers, said the report’s findings echoed members’ experiences with Uber. “Minicab drivers throughout the UK have been exploited by operators for years but Uber’s entry to the market has accelerated a race to the bottom.”
TfL has argued for a cap on driver licensing under both the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and his predecessor, Boris Johnson, but says it would require the government to legislate, which it has not been willing to do.
A government spokesman said: “Taxis and private hire vehicles provide a vital service for many people and businesses across the country. We are committed to supporting the industry, with safety a priority.
“We are keen to ensure our employment rules keep up to date to reflect new ways of working, and that’s why we have asked the Royal Society for the Arts chief executive, Matthew Taylor, to conduct an independent review into modern working practices.” 
If you are a female traffic warden or probation officer read on for good news. If you are a female chief executive you may want to look away now.
The UK’s stubbornly wide gender pay gap is well-known. Almost half a century on from the gender pay act, there is still an 18.1% difference in average pay between men and women. Of course, such average figures for all employees tell a narrow story. They don’t, for example, account for the fact more women work in lower-paid jobs or sectors.
But now people can quickly look up how things stand between the sexes in their particular job with a new interactive tool from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). It also shows how many women and men work in each role.
For example, women classed as “chief executives and senior officials” are paid 28.7% less than men in that group, at £34.91 an hour versus £48.94 an hour for men. Women hold 30% of those jobs.
It’s a similar story among bank managers. Women classed as “financial institution managers and directors” earn 36% less than men.
The ONS’s own staff might well have been disappointed with the results on “actuaries, statisticians and economists” where women are paid 20% less than men.
Things look better for cleaners, nurses, bar staff and further education teachers, where the gap is zero.
The pay gap goes the other way in some jobs. Female probation officers earn 25% more than men, women in “parking and civil enforcement occupations” earn 19% more, while female physiotherapists are paid 16% more.
The ONS adds a word of caution to its new tool. The pay gap figures do not reveal differences in rates of pay for comparable jobs. So where there is a gap for your occupation this does not mean men are getting more than women for exactly the same work.
As the statisticians point out, the reasons for the pay gap are more complex, and include the fact women are more likely to work part time, which can mean a lower rate of pay. Women are also underrepresented in senior roles, something which may be down to people’s attitudes to gender roles, lack of flexible working or women taking time to look after their family.
The tool was a joint project with the Government Equalities Office and comes ahead of new rules next April that will force large employers to report their gender pay and gender bonus gaps. The regulations will affect almost 8,000 employers with about 11 million employees.
Launching the new pay gap checker, the minister for women and equalities, Justine Greening, noted that the gender pay gap was now the lowest on record and that there were more women in work than ever before.
“But if we are to help women to reach their potential and eliminate the gender pay gap, we need to shine a light on our workplaces to see where there is more to do,” she said.
“This tool will empower both men and women to challenge this issue in their profession and help people to make more informed decisions about their career.
“Employers must play their part in this too and take action to tackle the gender pay gap in their organisation.”
Senders of Christmas cards to Australia, New Zealand and, bizarrely, Greece, need to get them in the post by Saturday 10 December if they are to arrive by the 25th, according to Royal Mail. Tuesday 20 December is the last date for second-class UK deliveries.
Those to Germany, Italy, Poland must go next Wednesday (14 Dec) while most other European countries are either next Friday or Saturday 17. If you are yet to buy your cards, we recommend a Guardian Money best-buy – the handmade cards from Sreepur in Bangladesh.
The Sreepur Village project cares for up to 100 destitute women and 500 abandoned children. Started 25 years ago by former British Airways flight attendant Pat Kerr, it helps fund itself from the sale of the cards it makes.
You can hand over your money safe in the knowledge that the organisation has made a real difference: in 2009 we visited the project and were so impressed that we have promoted the cards ever since. A pack of 16 costs £14.75, delivered in the UK. British Airways flies the cards to the UK for free, while volunteers collect and distribute them here. This ensures 100% of the money spent on the cards goes directly to Sreepur.
It is symbolic that the village makes Christmas cards, as 25 December is when the children celebrate their collective birthday. Most do not know their true date of birth, as they were often abandoned by parents who could no longer afford to feed them.
It is currently offering Guardian readers a special offer – a free extra pack of 16 cards with every order made.
For more information and to buy the cards go to Sreepurcards.org. Cards are sent within 24 hours.
Banks might have to pay out more in compensation to victims of the £40bn payment protection insurance scandal after the financial regulator delayed a decision on setting a deadline for complaints.
The Financial Conduct Authority said in August it was considering a mid-2019 cutoff for PPI claims and would decide before the end of 2016. The proposed deadline was more than a year later than the industry had expected, raising the prospect of more claims being allowed.
The FCA said it had received a large volume of responses to its proposal and that it would decide on the deadline in the first three months of next year. The delay means the final deadline for claims is likely to be pushed back by a few months from the mid-2019 date.
The regulator said: “The timetable was … subject to a number of variables including the extent and nature of the feedback received in response to the consultation. We have received a large amount of feedback and, given the importance of this matter, we are carefully considering the issues raised.”
The bill for the PPI scandal topped £40bn in October when Barclays increased its provisions to £8.4bn in response to the FCA’s previous announcement. Lloyds, the biggest seller of PPI, increased its provisions by £1bn to £17bn the same month and said it hoped the charge would cap its costs.
Banks may now need to set more money aside to deal with PPI, which is the most expensive scandal to affect the UK financial industry.
Barclays shares closed down 2.5% at 233p on Friday, while Lloyds shares were down 1.6% to 61.7p.
The FCA delayed its decision as it emerged Santander had failed to provide customers with information about PPI required under rules governing the scandal.
The Competition and Markets Authority said Santander failed to send letters to more than 500 customers that set out the cost of PPI and reminded them they were allowed to cancel the product. The CMA said the bank had sent letters in which it apologised to customers and said it would issue refunds if the customers cancel policies within six months of receiving the apology.
Banks sold highly profitable PPI alongside mortgages, loans and credit cards from the late 1990s. PPI was meant to repay borrowings if a customer became ill or unemployed but policies were often structured to limit payouts, imposed on customers as a condition of a loan or sold to people who would not qualify for a claim.
Britain’s biggest buy-to-let landlord, Fergus Wilson, says future investors will never be able to match the financial success he has enjoyed – and that landlords’ days in this country are numbered.
Fergus and his wife Judith bought nearly 1,000 homes in Ashford and Maidstone in Kent, but are now in the process of selling up. He reckons the much tougher lending criteria, with larger deposits and higher rental income requirements, will kill off the market for future buyers.
“It will be impossible to achieve in the future what Judith and I achieved. The constraints put on [buy to let] by the government will ensure that. It is keen to ensure there is never a repeat of 2008… it is being cautious, some will argue over-cautious. The days of the small buy-to-let landlord are numbered. Very many landlords are exiting because of restrictive tax conditions due to hit them.”
The number of houses bought with buy-to-let mortgages is already slumping, according to the Council of Mortgage Lenders. Its economist, Bob Pannell, predicts a “fairly substantial” fall in buy-to-let lending in 2017, suggesting that 2015 may turn out to have been “peak buy to let” year.
“We are already at or past the peak for buy-to-let lending,” he says. “We are currently running at around 6,000 new purchases a month using buy-to-let mortgages, compared with 10,000-11,000 in the corresponding period last year. The combination of a tightening in lending criteria and changes to tax relief are the key drivers.”
Paul Smith, chief executive of the haart chain of estate agents, says the number of buy-to-let transactions has tumbled 63% this year, amid what he calls a “war on landlords”.
“The scale of decline in buy to let in just 12 months is deeply worrying – landlords have clearly pulled out of the market and are unlikely to return any time soon. This is entirely the result of government policy, with Theresa May picking up George Osborne’s baton and proceeding to bash landlords with renewed vigour. The effect has been to more than halve the number of buy-to-let sales in England and Wales, and the inevitable consequence will be fewer properties available to renters next year, and higher rents.”
Buy-to-let lending will fall 20% next year, says Stuart Law, whose company Assetz has been among the biggest proponents of property investing. “Buy-to-let lending will be much lower in 2017 than 2016, perhaps 20% lower. The mortgage interest tax will lead to reduced borrowing in low-yield locations like London, and also lower mortgage loan-to-value levels generally. For landlords in London, selling up is already the reality. Property yields in the city are so low that some find themselves already subsidising their tenants even before all the tax changes come in. Beyond the M25, however, it’s another world.”
But at the CML, Pannell points out that only between 30%-40% of rented properties in the UK have a buy-to-let mortgage attached to them, and therefore won’t be affected by changes to tax relief.
Even landlords who are facing steep tax hikes may decide to carry on, because the alternatives are worse. Simon Rubinsohn, economist for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), says: “Yields have been compressed and returns aren’t as attractive as they were. But when you look at the alternatives, landlords do not find any greater comfort from the idea of putting their money in the banks or on the stock market.”
Research by Rics in August found that most landlords said the tax changes would make no difference to their plans, but the proportion saying they would decrease their property portfolios over five years was 40%.
At the Intermediary Mortgage Lending Association, director Peter Williams shares the view that landlords will stay in the market. “While the changes are significant, residential property remains an attractive investment – rents tend to rise at least in line with inflation. Though a minority of landlords may sell up as a result of the changes, this is unlikely to be as widespread as many believe.”
The good news for tenants is that the tax changes could dampen property speculation and create a fairer market, according to Dan Wilson Craw of campaign group Generation Rent. “The government has recognised that the appeal of buy-to-let investment is not only making it harder for people to buy their first home, but is drawing capital away from productive parts of the economy, such as job-creating businesses and building new homes.
“Both the stamp duty surcharge and withdrawal of tax relief will reduce the incentives for borrowing heavily to speculate on house prices, and help create a fairer housing market.”
But he says much more needs to be done to protect existing tenants. “While first-time buyers will enjoy a more favourable market, the tax changes won’t make the slightest difference to the chronic instability of the private rented sector. The government now has to help those who are stuck renting for years to come, with protections from unfair evictions and much greater investment in social housing.”
The big unknown is how rents will behave. At estate agency Jackson-Stops and Staff, Nick Leeming is not sure that landlords will be able to push up rents much. “Supply and demand is a crucial factor in setting the level of rent, and this will be the overriding consideration in landlord decisions to increase rent or otherwise. We are actually finding that, in general, tenants are increasingly savvy, willing to look around and unwilling to pay over the odds on rent. The burden passed on to tenants will therefore need to be limited for landlords’ properties to be competitive.”
But the Residential Landlords Association reckons that rent rises are inevitable. Policy director David Smith says: “These changes will simply place an upward pressure on rents which in the end will only cause difficulties for tenants.”
Stuart Law puts it more bluntly. “It is unquestionable that landlords will pass these new tax costs on to tenants. In my view it isn’t even a matter for debate. In buy-to-let circles this retrospective mortgage interest tax is at best unethical, or at worst taking people’s hard earned retirement income – and it’s not known as the ‘tenant tax’ for nothing. If they have to pay more it is crystal clear that this cost will end up hitting tenants, not landlords.”
When my boss, and her boss, beckoned me to follow them to the meeting room downstairs, I picked up a notepad and pen and braced myself for a boring chat about press releases. It was a chilly, grey Friday in the middle of January, and I really just wanted to get through the day without incident so I could go to the pub.
If my superiors seemed tense or sombre, I didn’t really notice. My boss started with, “So, we’ve been having a chat …” and I made a thoughtful, attentive face and uncapped a biro before processing the last part of her sentence, which was “ ... and it’s not really working with you here, is it?” What wasn’t working? The biro?
Her boss took over. “You’ve got some great ideas, and you’re a good writer, but you’re not doing the job we hired you to do. We need a person who is really hot on organisation, and you’ve said yourself that it’s not your strong point.”
His eyes rested on the exposed inches of my lower back – I’d left my belt at my boyfriend’s house that morning, and my jeans did not meet my jumper. “We’ll give you next month’s pay, and references. You can always tell people this was just an internship.” Finally, I got it. My eyes shone and my lower lip wobbled. Awkwardly, my boss – ex-boss now – patted my hand. “One day, this moment will go in your memoirs.”
Even as a grandiose, delusional 22-year-old with a rich fantasy life, I thought her comment was ridiculous. However, not quite 10 years later I have written a book – my third book – which features an account of the incident. (It’s called How to Be a Grown Up, and will be published next spring.)
If I had been slightly better at working in PR, if I’d kept my head down and made more coffees and learned how to send mass emails without accidentally addressing every journalist as “Dear Simon”, there’s a chance I’d still be there, miserable and bookless.
The passing of time has made me realise that I’m not the heroine of this anecdote, and my bosses were not baddies. No human being has ever been as bad at anything as I was at that job. They were right to fire me.
The previous summer, I’d graduated from university with an upper second in English literature. I’d spent the three years vacillating between arrogance and panic. Of course I’d do OK in the end. I always did! But what if I didn’t? I’d had plenty of confidence wobbles at school, but I tended to come out on top afterwards.
At university, the work was much harder, and I spent more time resenting its difficulty than actually applying myself. Getting a degree against all the odds served to bolster my noxious privilege, my James I-style sense that I deserved a happy ending as long as I worried enough during the second act.
Being the first of my friends to find a “proper” job seemed to confirm this. Admittedly, my understanding of PR was entirely based on the film Sliding Doors, and I didn’t really want a career in it. However, the idea of pursuing my actual dreams, and writing for a living, seemed laughable. I’d really have to compete for that sort of job! I’d have failed before I got started.
Getting fired taught me that I’m not the sort of person who “deserves” a happy ending. I deserve nothing. I made a poor choice, I was ill-suited to the role, I hadn’t tried hard enough – and it was up to me to deal with the consequences.
It also showed me there’s no virtue or validation that comes from compromising. It’s not fair to anyone to graciously make them your second choice. When everything goes wrong – and it will – they won’t choose you back.
I was lucky enough to be able to move back to my parents’ house and to find work temping in a call centre. And while there, my dream job was advertised. It was a features internship at a teen magazine, and I longed to work there with a ferocity that made me miserable. Everyone would want it! What was the point of applying?
Still, I had no Plan B to hide behind, and nothing left to lose. My editor told me she decided to give me the job when I told her I’d rather work for her than at Vogue. I meant it.
I had been knocked off a straightforward career path and forced to find my own way through the woods. Now, as a freelance writer, I do a job I love. I think I deserve it, but I’ve worked hard to earn it, getting up early, writing at weekends, constantly doing everything I can to demonstrate my enthusiasm and commitment to my choice. Losing my job taught me the world doesn’t owe me a living. Failing badly was the motivation I needed to try my luck, and follow my passions.
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I am a self-employed Tefl teacher in London. I set up my business in 2012 and I’ve been working hard on my website and blog. I enjoy what I do but the problem is that I don’t get that many inquiries because my website isn’t in the first few pages of Google.
I advertise through Gumtree but it’s £100 a week (for a featured ad). I’ve also tried Google adwords but that’s pricey as well. I’m wondering if you have any ideas about how I can advertise or get funding to build my business.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
 Semi-detached relatives could live semi-detached lives in the two buildings, for both have enormous, soaring-ceilinged living rooms overlooked by mezzanines, and both have bedrooms and bathrooms, two of the former in one and three in the other.
You can shop till you drop if you live in one of these properties, located in Essex, Wiltshire and Leeds
Amazon has launched a real-world shop that allows customers to walk in, take what they want and walk out. No checkouts, no queues. As they explain in the FAQ about Amazon Go:
This new model of shopping not only challenges established retailers, but it raises serious questions about the future of work and the changing nature of the economy more generally. Furthermore, it suggests the role of government will need to change, involving itself less with regulating business and more with redistributing wealth.
At this stage the store is only available to Amazon employees, though public versions are due to be opened in the US early in 2017. An Australian version is likely some time after that. Indeed, Amazon is currently gearing up to launch a number of its services in Australia, including AmazonFresh, its grocery delivery service.
All of these are likely to shake up the various cartels (Coles/Woolworths, David Jones/Myer) that dominate certain retail sectors in Australia, but it is Amazon Go that is likely to be the real disruptor.
The ramifications for employment seem obvious. In the US, around five million people are employed in retail, while Australia has 1.3 million and Britain 2.8 million. Stores like Amazon Go could therefore mean many job losses. Retailers could realise savings of something in the order of 15% of running costs, an amount that is likely to make the technology very attractive. And really, it is just the next logical development from the automated checkouts already in use in most supermarkets, or the self-serve kiosks McDonald’s is already rolling out.
Of course, Amazon Go may create work too, most likely value-add services involving things like handling returns or gift-wrapping, but that is hardly likely to make up for other job losses. It will also need people involved in stock ordering and logistics, though again, not many. Amazon is already well advanced in using robotics to do these things, with years of experience developing such technologies in its “fulfilment centres” (the creepy name they use for their warehouses).
So by any measure, it’s hard to see how an operation like Amazon Go doesn’t ultimately mean fewer jobs.
Is it all bad? Of course not. I mean, no queues or checkouts? From a shopper’s point of view, what’s not to love?
Amazon Go addresses another rising problem too. There has been concern for a while that cities and other retail centres will hollow out as people increasingly shop online, but imagine shopping if all the big stores were like Amazon Go. With no checkout queues, it’s easy to picture a vibrant city or suburban centre where people come to buy the stuff they want, are less stressed about it and are therefore willing to linger in public spaces listening to buskers or drinking coffee. Who knows what other services they might avail themselves of?
But there is a more important point to make.
Amazon Go, along with businesses like Uber, Airbnb, Netflix, and even Google and Facebook, are part of a fundamental restructuring of the economy and the work that goes with it. It is not simply that the technology is causing jobs to be lost. It is that it is changing the relationship between businesses and employees, governments and citizens.
We are moving from a globalised world of manufacturing giants to a networked one of technology giants.
In the former, the role of government was to coordinate and create markets, local and international, and to define the rules under which we all operated. Firms themselves tended to do just one thing – make cars, for instance – and so benefited from a permanent, full-time workforce. This provided security and prosperity to a substantial middle class.
In the networked world of technology companies, firms are no longer stand-alone silos that do a single thing. They tend to be project-based, pulling together casual workforces to achieve particular outcomes. Their employees are almost by definition contingent (and often not technically employees).
The role of government in this sort of economy is more to facilitate innovation and education, but that won’t be enough.
Left to itself, this sort of economy is also a recipe for massive inequality and insecurity. Platforms like Uber or Amazon Go, because they need so few workers, tend to funnel the wealth they generate to owners and investors rather than distribute it broadly via wages.
The role of government therefore becomes one of equalisation, of finding ways to see that the wealth generated in the new economy doesn’t simply flow to a tiny number of people at the top of the new corporations. The most efficient way for governments to do this is by the mechanism of a universal basic income, a guaranteed wage for everyone, that not only provides a financial floor below which no one can fall, but allows us to redefine the sort of work we do and find meaningful.
That is to say, by breaking the link between survival and work, UBI allows us all to not only benefit from the technology, but to reinvent what we even mean by the concept of work.
Aside from climate change, this reinvention of work is the most wicked problem facing humanity, and we can see the unease it causes reflected in the politics surrounding Brexit, and of Donald Trump, Bernie Sanders, Jeremy Corbyn and Pauline Hanson. What all these politicians have in common is they promise to “bring back the jobs” because they understand how important a decent job is to most people.
But developments like Amazon Go are a sharp reminder of how hollow such promises are. Our societies are being transformed right before our eyes. Automation is increasingly displacing human workers and so the politicians we need are not those playing on our insecurities by conjuring an image of the past, but those who can offer us a realistic vision of what comes next.
Also, the stress of being a freelancer worker, and our Consumer Champions tackle your vexing problems
Rows about the finances of Transport for London (TfL) were prominent during this year’s election campaign and also a bit odd. For years, Conservatives had claimed that the large and powerful mayoral agency is a bloated bureaucracy in need of ruthless trimming, yet there was the Tory candidate – a Mr Goldsmith, you might recall - insisting that it could not cope with its fares being frozen for four years, while Labour man Sadiq Khan was pledging to transform it into a paragon of enterprise and efficiency.
Seven months on from Khan’s big win, the first TfL business plan of his mayoralty has appeared. The sums are there on paper. So are Khan’s ambitious promises. Political opponents, naturally, say neither add up, with Tory AM Keith Prince worrying that the number crunching bites too deeply into TfL’s reserves and even using the word “socialist” to describe them - on Her Majesty’s BBC too! He also points out, quite correctly, that borrowing is going to soar.
Certainly, Khan is pushing the principle of “less from more”, embraced by his predecessor Boris Johnson as an exacting and yet bracing austerity obligation, into adventurous new territory. TfL’s income is in a pincer squeeze, as the government’s operational grant is phased out and Khan’s fares policy means less coming in than would have been the case had he allowed them to rise by inflation or more.
In round numbers, TfL says it will have £3.5bn less from those sources over the next five years but that £4bn of savings will more than make up for it, by shedding expensive staff, renegotiating contracts and merging departments. Its annual budget is £11.5bn. “We are driving efficiency through the biggest ever overhaul of our organisation,” writes TfL commissioner Mike Brown in his foreword.
Meanwhile, the network’s capacity to move people around, both above ground and below it, needs to go on enlarging as London’s population booms. The opening of Crossrail – the Elizabeth Line – in 2018 will create more space and bring in more money too, but the then TfL commissioner Sir Peter Hendy predicted way back in March 2013 that “it will be immediately full”.
Rising passenger numbers and trips in general will bump revenues up too - by 38% by 2021, TfL predicts - including on the buses, though be warned that the numbers of journeys made on London’s buses fell by 3.6% in the year to June. Green Party AM Caroline Russell has welcomed a £770m commitment to cycling, but says she fears that without measures to reduce the number of cars, “less space on the roads thanks to new measures for cycling and walking means buses will be stuck in traffic”. Congestion isn’t good for anyone’s business, including TfL’s.
In the longer term, TfL has plans to increase the frequency of trains on the Underground and to bring forward the Bakerloo Line extension by two years to 2029. More immediately, it is stressing its own importance as a facilitator of economic growth, stimulating employment and development. Brown writes that this benefits not only Londoners but also “the entire country”.
It is, perhaps, a measure of government incoherence over dealing with withdrawal from the European Union that transport minister Chris Grayling has ditched the deal to hand control of Southern and other suburban rail services to TfL, infuriating even London fellow Tory politicians. Giving the capital more autonomy could usefully assist with propping up the UK economy in the uncertain years ahead. And should Khan’s transport budgets start to come unstuck, maybe bailing him out will be thought worth it. Like it or not, Leave Nation cannot afford to let Remain City fail.
The new draft Transport for London business plan is here. 
Britain’s final salary pension funds have slashed their ownership of stock-market listed companies to just 7% of their total holdings following a huge shift in recent years to overseas stock markets and government bonds.
The move away from owning UK stocks emphasises how dependent Britain’s estimated 13.5 million past and present final salary scheme members have become on returns from shares in US, continental and emerging market companies to generate a retirement income.
The rapidly ageing membership of Britain’s guaranteed, defined benefit pension schemes has also forced a huge shift into government bonds as scheme trustees attempt to reduce the risk of their fund becoming insolvent.
According to the annual pension fund health check by the Pension Protection Fund, the 5,794 UK defined benefit pension schemes faced a £780bn deficit at the end of March 2016, little changed on the year before.
A combination of falling global share prices and a slump in the interest paid on government bonds offset a flood of special contributions by employers that cost £10.5bn in the first half of 2016.
The number of active scheme members fell below 1.5 million for the first time, the PPF said, increasing the number of deferred members with a frozen guaranteed payout.
German car giant BMW became the latest firm to propose shutting its final-salary pension schemes when it said in September that it would shift the 5,000 staff at its plants in the UK over to its less generous defined-contribution scheme.
Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at the stockbroker Hargreaves Lansdown, said the £780bn deficit was “staggering” and revealed the uphill task faced by employers in meeting their obligations to employees.
He said the change in the composition of investments also illustrated how the relationship between employers and the UK pension system had changed significantly in the past 10 years.
“Pension schemes used to be owners of UK companies as well as being funded by them. Now, the bulk of scheme assets are invested overseas or in bonds. What’s more, as schemes mature, they will increasingly become net sellers of assets.
“Pensions being used to help finance the growth in British companies is becoming a thing of the past; instead our savings are either being lent to the government or invested abroad.”
The PPF, which was set up as an industry-backed lifeboat fund for crashed schemes, said the proportion of overseas-quoted shares in equity holdings increased from 65.4% to 68.6%. The share of bonds in scheme portfolios rose from 47.7% to 51.3%.
Andrew McKinnon, the PPF’s chief financial officer, said: “While scheme funding remained largely stable in the year to March, there have been large swings in funding since June.
“When we look back at what progress schemes have made over the last decade it appears that many schemes are just treading water. The average recovery plan length, at around eight years, has barely improved, which brings home the challenge we now face.
“The current economic backdrop, as well as scrutiny faced by the entire industry, suggests conditions will remain tough in 2017.”
A British outsourcing company whose contracts include collecting the BBC licence fee is to replace staff with robots as it slashes costs.
Capita, a FTSE 100-listed firm that also runs the London congestion charge, said it needed to axe 2,000 jobs as part of a cost-cutting drive in response to poor trading.
It said it would use the money it saved from sacking thousands of staff to fund investment in automated technology across all of the company’s divisions. The announcement will fuel growing fears that human workers will have to make way for robots, as companies turn to technology to boost profits.
The Apple and Samsung supplier Foxconn was reported to have replaced 60,000 workers with robots earlier this year, while the former chief executive of McDonald’s suggested a similar tactic in response to low-paid workers’ demands for better pay and conditions.
In a gloomy statement that sent its shares to a 10-year low at one stage, Capita said it had been hit by “headwinds” as its corporate clients reined in their spending. The company unveiled plans to shore up its finances, saving £50m a year via austerity measures, including greater use of “proprietary robotic solutions” and moving around 200 jobs to India.
The chief executive, Andy Parker, said Capita, which made a pre-tax profit of £186m in the first six months of this year, would use robots to help eliminate human error and make decisions faster. The company employs 78,000 people.
“It doesn’t remove the need for an individual but it speeds up how they work, which means you need less [sic] people to do it.”
He said a human assisted by automated robotic technology could do a 40-minute job in much less time.
“They [human staff members] can then do 10 times the amount they used to, so you need less [sic] people to do the same amount of work.”
Parker said this would make the company more efficient by “taking away some of the decision-making and cutting down potential errors”.
Capita, which provides services ranging from electronic tagging for offenders to store card services for retailers, will also move some of its IT operation abroad. Parker said this would involve “a couple of hundred” jobs being shifted to India.
The company’s decisions on staffing are part of an attempt to reduce costs without causing shareholders any financial pain. Parker said the cost cuts – coupled with asset sales – would allow Capita to avoid reducing its annual dividend, which was worth £200m last year and £180m the year before.
But despite the effort to protect investors, shares in the company finished down more than 4%, having fallen more than 14% during the day, as investors were left stunned by the company’s pessimistic outlook.
Parker said he “would have thought there’d be a more positive reaction”.
Rehana Azam, the national secretary for public services at the GMB union, said: “Public services are predominantly delivered by people so it’s hard to see how they’re going to provide a cost-efficient service from call centres in another country.
“We’d want to sit down with Capita and make sure people are treated fairly in any process that ends with them losing jobs.”
Azam cast doubt on whether using robots to automate some of its systems would work. “We’ve never had a good track record with private providers delivering computerised systems. I’d like to see where there have been good examples of that kind of automation.”
Capita has struggled as its clients, which include O2, M&S, John Lewis and Dixons Carphone, have looked to cut costs in areas such as corporate travel and recruitment.
The company refused to blame the Brexit vote for the disappointing update but said earlier this year that uncertainty over the UK’s relationship with the European Union had hit its business, delaying key contracts.
Capita is predominantly UK-based, unlike bigger rivals, such as G4S and Serco, which have been sheltered to a large degree from the Brexit-related fallout by their bigger geographical footprint.
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
‘I felt vulnerable’: freelancers on the stress of self-employment
Number’s up with Nationwide as it blocks all my accounts
Going into reverse with Avis over hire car repair receipt
Can we divorce to avoid the higher stamp duty on second homes? Since April, anyone buying a second property has faced a higher stamp duty bill than an owner occupier – our mortgage expert advises a reader who is considering drastic action to avoid the cost.
If you’re planning to send money overseas for Christmas get competitive exchange rates and free online currency transfers from Moneycorp, provider of the Guardian money transfer service.
Get 21 days of winter sports cover as standard with the Guardian’s annual travel insurance, provided by Voyager. 
Labour isn’t working. That is to say: working for a living is not providing a living, at least not for the 7.4 million people, which includes 2.6 million children, who are living in poverty despite being in working households.
And yet how can this be? Hasn’t there been a “jobs miracle” in this country? Unemployment is below 5%, and there are more people at work here than at any time before. There has been steady if unspectacular economic growth over the past few years, and the national minimum wage has risen quite sharply, for the over-25s at least. The official numbers – some of them – look pretty good. Something is amiss.
Research by the New Policy Institute for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation reveals that high housing costs, cuts to working-age benefits and persistently low wages combine to keep working people at or below poverty levels. This is an economy almost designed to keep people poor. And whereas work has always been seen as the route out of poverty, now the offer of a job – perhaps part-time, low-paid, insecure – offers no such guarantees at all. The economist John Philpott has written that we seem to have chosen “a low-productivity, low-real-wage-growth, path to full employment. We could, and should, have done better.”
There has been head-scratching in Westminster over why an economic argument that seemed to persuade people to believe in the government at the time of the May 2015 general election failed to work a year later during June’s EU referendum. Perhaps at that May election the government was being given the benefit of the doubt for one final time. After several years of a squeeze on household incomes some were finally beginning to feel a bit better off, as petrol prices fell and a supermarket price war made the weekly shop a little cheaper.
But a year on the underlying reality had not improved. A vote for Brexit allowed millions of people to declare that they were not happy, much to the surprise of the experts in London who thought that the aggregate macro-economic data told a reasonably good story.
The former chancellor, George Osborne, was one of the main victims of this popular revolt. He has started to reflect on all this, as he told the Financial Times in September. “There’s a pretty profound sense out there that the system’s not working for people, and instead of telling people, ‘Shut up, you’ve never had it so good,’ you’ve got to respond to that,” he said. “I’m not sure I fully understand it.”
The system is not working because while there are still well-paid and stimulating jobs for some, for many the prospects are miserable. The gap has grown between those who can look forward to something like a career, and those who move in and out of precarious and badly paid jobs.
If business leaders do not invest in higher “value-adding” enterprises, or choose not to build up the skills and capabilities of their staff, then this pattern will not change. There will be “gigs” for lowly paid service jobs, and not a lot else.
Even in a sector that could see substantial growth, such as long-term social care, the preferred business model is a low- wage one. This is a question of value and values. Businesses could opt for a different approach – higher wages, greater job stability, a better quality of service – but they would have to be sure the demand would be there for the more expensive option. Cuts to local government budgets means this is unlikely to be the case for a long time to come.
Ignore people for long enough and they may start shouting. That is one way of interpreting at least one aspect of the Brexit vote. Those at the top have to start listening, and acting.
But at the business, energy and industrial strategy select committee hearing earlier this week I saw how much still needs to change. Two distinguished FTSE 100 company chairmen, Sir John Hood from WPP, the advertising group, and Jan du Plessis, chairman of the mining company Rio Tinto, were asked for their views on the relationship between pay at the top and the rest of the organisation.
While Du Plessis described the role of a chief executive as “frighteningly important”, with all that this might imply for what they get paid, he felt that publishing the pay ratio between the top and others in the workforce would tell us “nothing”.
Hood said that he struggled to understand what the concept of an average worker really signified in a professional services firm such as his. “I’m not even sure what the word ‘worker’ means,” he said.
For more than two decades employers have told us that their people are “their biggest asset”. Now, apparently, they struggle to recognise who or what they are. Work should be a route to a better way of life, but this will happen only when we value, and pay, people properly. We can and should do better.
Q I was wondering if, under the new stamp duty laws for second properties, it would be worthwhile considering a divorce before purchasing? My husband does not own any property and we are considered purchasing a home together. I do, however, own property and intend to rent out our current home (which is solely in my name) when we move. Under the new laws, we would have to pay stamp duty of £25,800 each (£51,600 in total) on our new property.
I know that in any circumstance I am subject to the additional stamp duty, but I understand that if we were not married my husband would not be. Is it feasible to get a divorce if we are still cohabiting and in a relationship? I would appreciate your information – it seems that unmarried couples are at an advantage in this circumstance. RB
A Do I think you should go through a fake divorce to save on stamp duty land tax (SDLT)? In a word: no. The main reason is that, according to Jacqueline Major, head of the family team at divorce lawyers, Hodge, Jones & Allen, to be able to divorce, “you must show that the marriage has irretrievably broken down and rely on one of the following in support: adultery; unreasonable behaviour; two years’ separation with consent to divorce; two years’ desertion; five years’ separation without consent.”
If you are still living together and in a relationship, proving that your marriage has irretrievably broken down is going to be tricky without resorting to telling untruths.
Another reason for not divorcing is that if you and your husband are buying your new home jointly, being unmarried is not going to help.
The advantage unmarried couples have is that if one owns his or her own property, it isn’t taken into account if the other partner also buys property in his or her sole name.
So if you were not married, your partner would have to be buying your new family home in his name only to get round the higher rate of tax.
Each individual owns only one property so the higher rate of SDLT for second properties does not apply. In the same circumstances, a married couple would have to pay the higher rate of SDLT on the second property. This is because the two people in a married couple or civil partnership are treated as one for the purposes of working out whether the higher rates of SDLT on second properties are payable.
However, if either half of an unmarried couple already has property and they decide to buy another property in joint names, they would be in exactly the same position as a married couple because the higher rate of SDLT would be applied to the second property. The same is true where a parent who already owns a home buys a property jointly with a child to help them on to the property ladder.
There have never before been so many self-employed workers in the UK. There are now almost 4.8 million people working for themselves across the country, in a spectrum of jobs ranging from cycle couriers to architects, according to the Office for National Statistics.
It might seem that, as your own boss, you can manage your own hours, take time out for exercise, meet friends for coffee – all hugely positive for mental health and wellbeing. But it doesn’t always work that way.
Isolation, financial pressures, irregular hours and an inability to switch off can have a real impact when not managed properly, says Cary Cooper, professor of organisational psychology and health at MBS Manchester University. “For self-employed people, it’s a real problem. It can lead to the common mental health disorders – stress, depression and anxiety.”
Claire Crawley went freelance when she was made redundant from a permanent job with the NHS following budget cuts. She and her husband, James, a self-employed electrician, lived in rural Devon and the redundancy coincided with the birth of their second child. Her background is in PR and communications, work she could do remotely, and self-employment seemed to make sense. “If you live in the countryside in Devon, you are looking at a 30-mile commute to pretty much anywhere, there and back, and there were no part-time jobs at all, so freelance was about the only way to go,” says Crawley. “At the time I was really motivated. I thought I would cut down on travel time, work when I was free and take time off when I wasn’t, go to class assemblies, all the other things you can’t do in a job.”
Crawley soon built up a client base but found striking any kind of work-life balance was enormously difficult. She was faced with a very irregular workload and demanding clients. “I would book for the children to go to the child-minder because I knew I had a deadline. Then the client wouldn’t give me the information I needed to do the work in time, so I would pay for the kids to go to the child-minder, pick them up and put them to bed, then work until 2am trying to finish the project to deadline, because I wouldn’t get paid otherwise,” she says.
The financial instability was also extremely stressful. “We felt vulnerable. When you are used to having a regular income coming in, you completely take that for granted, but if you are freelancer and your time is your sole asset, it is really difficult,” she says. One client she had worked with for five years suddenly no longer needed her and she lost a significant chunk of work with little notice. “If you get made redundant, there is a process you go through, but if you have clients you are completely at their mercy.”
Crawley says she feels like “there is some big con”: “We keep on being told we’re being liberated by this, and yet you don’t earn as much as you would do. You’re constantly worried about being sick or injuring yourself in some way that would render you unable to work for a little while.”
Freelance illustrator Emmeline Pidgen has been self-employed since she graduated six years ago and has also found herself at the financial mercy of her clients. She has involved lawyers in a dispute with an overseas publisher who hasn’t paid her for about three years. She, too, has found achieving a balance with work and home life difficult at times, but the isolation of working alone has been the main problem.
“You don’t have group brainstorming sessions, motivating staff talks, even colleagues to talk to about office gossip,” she says. “You have to have a real drive to push through and feel confident with your own direction and ideas, but the loneliness can affect you.”
Isolation is a major problem, says Cooper. “There can be a lack of sociability, even for an IT consultant or a management consultant who works in house or face-to-face with clients,” he says. “You might be seeing people and interacting with others, but you are not part of a company’s culture. You never investing in a longer-term relationship. When you have a permanent job, you usually have a couple of colleagues who you become friends with, who you would see outside of work, but you don’t get that when you are not part of the organisation.”
According to the Health and Safety Executive, among employed staff, stress accounted for 37% of all work-related ill health cases and 45% of working days lost to ill health. Absence due to work-related stress, depression or anxiety accounts for around 11.7m work days lost among employees.
If you’re self-employed, taking time off is likely to cost money. Even a regular client is unlikely to have to pay you if you cannot work. James Moss, partner at employment law firm Slate Legal, says: “The self-employed enjoy no statutory employment rights.” Instead of statutory sick pay, self-employed people who become unable to work thought illness or disability need to apply for employment and support allowance (ESA) – one of those benefits earmarked by the chancellor for cuts.
With very little in terms of a financial safety net or emotional support, it’s important for self-employed people to protect their own wellbeing. “We would recommend you build a network of people so that you have some way to access support,” says Emma Mamo, head of workplace wellbeing at mental health charity Mind. “Consider working in hubs with other people. Build contacts with other freelancers in your area, professional networks and so on, but also friends and family.”
When work takes over, it may be time to learn to say no. “People don’t think they can turn work down, but once you have experience and you’re settled, and have built up a network, you have to realise that when you are good at something, you can afford to say ‘no’,” says Cooper. “You can say: ‘I’m too busy to take this on’, and they will call you back in the future.”
If things are getting too much, it is important to know when to seek help, he says. “You have to recognise the symptoms, and that isn’t always easy. If you’re having trouble getting up in the morning, if you’re tired even after 10 hours sleep, if you’re feeling low and blue all the time, if you’re hyper-anxious and constantly worrying all the time, if you are usually sociable and you don’t feel like seeing anybody. When people do suffer from anxiety and depression, they should go and get help, and can start by seeing their GP.”
Pidgen has now found an effective working pattern. Her invoicing system includes strong terms and conditions, and she doesn’t hesitate to either charge late fees or turn down work when clients treat her poorly. She has built networking into her routine – including a monthly meeting with other local illustrators – and she attempts to take more time out for herself. “I don’t think I would be as happy in a permanent job, as I am freelancing,” she says.
Crawley, on the other hand, decided self-employment was not for her. She and her family recently moved to her native Manchester, where she has a permanent job. “It’s brilliant. There is a whole training plan, I can bounce ideas off people,” she says. “Giving yourself permission to stop is much easier if you have fulfilled your professional requirements and that is recognised in some way. I’ve booked holiday for half-term and I know I definitely won’t work, and that is the first time that has happened in 10 years.”
I have several accounts with the Nationwide, and for the second time in six months it has blocked access to all of them because my bank statement was returned by the Post Office.
I live in a village where all the houses have names, and it’s quite common for delivery drivers or new postmen to fail to find houses. It would appear this postman merely returned the letter to sender, even though the house is clearly named – if not numbered – on a main road.
When any letter is returned, Nationwide immediately blocks access to my account and requires me to phone to restore the service. I have asked Nationwide if it would be possible to contact me first and only block my account if there is no confirmation, within an agreed timescale, but all I get is the mindlessly repeated mantra that “security is our number one priority”.
There must be a way to prevent this sort of debacle happening again. AT, Banbury
Given how many people live in unnumbered houses, you can’t be the only one affected. It’s good to know Nationwide has strict security measures in place, but these could, as you say, be harmlessly adapted when you’ve flagged up a problem.
A spokesperson says it acted with the “best of intentions” but apologises for the inconvenience. “A temporary block is normal practice when items are returned saying ‘no trace’, but we are reviewing our process around no trace mail to ensure inconvenience is kept to a minimum”.
Someone from the building society has now contacted you to discuss options. If the problem persists you could, of course, opt to go paperless and view statements online.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
A major cut in immigration from the European Union to Britain after Brexit would produce a damaging long-term hit to future economic growth while yielding only a “modest boost” of under 1% to the wages of low-paid workers, new research has found.
The study by the National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) thinktank says a “middle range” Brexit where EU immigration falls by as much as 91,000 a year would cut the growth of gross domestic product per head by 3.4% lower than it would otherwise have been by 2030.
But in the more extreme scenario of a hard Brexit where EU immigration was cut by 150,000 a year – which may be needed to hit Theresa May’s 100,000 a year net migration target – the economists say this would hit annual GDP per head by 5.4%.
While the economy was taking such a long-term damaging hit the NIESR economists say the effect on wages of those in low-skilled jobs in the most directly affected industries such as construction, retail, hospitality and food processing would be, if at all, relatively modest.
The study’s “middle range” scenario says the pay of those in such low-skilled jobs would rise by up to 0.51% by 2030 while in the hard Brexit scenario they would increase by 0.82% a year.
Jonathan Portes, NIESR research fellow and one of the report’s authors, said: “Prior to the referendum, a number of analyses estimated the long-term impacts of Brexit on the UK economy; but none incorporated the impacts of Brexit-induced reductions in migration. Our estimates suggest that the negative impacts on per capita GDP will be significant, potentially approaching those resulting from reduced trade.”
He said the 3.4% hit to per capita GDP from a 91,000 reduction in EU migration in the NIESR’s central scenario was on a similar scale to the impact from the falls in trade and investment projected by the Treasury, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) before the Brexit referendum.
The analysis by Portes and his co-author, Giuseppe Forte, shows that the economic damage of deep cuts in EU migration go even beyond the estimate made by the Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR) at the chancellor’s autumn statement last month.
The OBR, in the absence of a new government policy on immigration, based its assumptions on a conservative 80,000 a year reduction in net migration to Britain. It estimated that this cut would cost the economy £0.8bn in 2016-17 rising to £5.9bn a year by 2000-21 and with a total hit of £16bn over the next five years.
The NIESR estimate suggests a similar fall in EU immigration will prove even more damaging to the British economy. This is because, unlike the OBR model, it includes an assumption that the fall in net migration will also cut the growth in labour productivity in Britain by reducing the competition for work.
The authors say their analysis uses a methodology similar to that employed by mainstream economic forecasters to model the impact of Brexit-induced reductions in trade on productivity and growth.
“The broad scenario (not forecasts) we depict imply that the negative impacts on per capita GDP will be significant, potentially approaching those resulting from reduced trade. By contrast, the increase in low-skilled wages, resulting from reduced migration is expected to be, if at all, relatively modest,” they conclude.
The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, said she welcomed the report as it was being published at a time when evidence-based analysis on immigration and its effects was becoming a rarity: “The report requires further scrutiny, but in broad terms it clearly shows that economic growth would be hit substantially by sharp cuts in immigration, while any boost to wages is likely to be minimal and confined to some of the very lowest-paid sectors.
“Labour will offer a fair immigration policy, which benefits the whole economy and maximises prosperity for all. The government should abandon its unachievable and damaging net migration targets.”
Anxiety about losing your job to technology is both a rational and growing fear. Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank of England, recently estimated that 15m jobs in the UK were threatened by automation. Technology is reaching such levels of sophistication that it is capable not only of manual tasks but cognitive ones too, putting a wide range of jobs are at risk. The areas most vulnerable include driving and administrative work. But according to a report from Oxford University that looked at over 700 areas of work, teaching at all levels across the educational spectrum is a safe bet.
Yet the apparent safety of teaching as a profession doesn’t quite square with the boom in online courses. From the comfort of my sofa I can watch lectures from prestigious universities around the world, join the hundreds of millions of people who have enrolled on a Khan Academy course, enrol in a Mooc – a massive online open course – or upskill and change my career with a course from Lynda and many other education providers.
A lot of these courses are free, but those with accreditation attached tend to charge. The appeal for educational institutions is simple: you can pay a teacher once to deliver a lecture to an unlimited amount of students without having to pay for all the overheads it takes to run a building. Students are offered flexibility and can learn at a time and location that suits them. However, drop-out rates for these courses are extremely high and they present no real threat to education as we know it. It seems students still prefer a real classroom.
So why not replace teachers in classroom with technology? To understand why teachers’ careers are safe we need to ask two questions: what do teachers do all day and where does technology fall short?
A quick survey of teacher friends answers the first question: teachers provide pastoral care, direct the Christmas play, recognise and assist vulnerable pupils, cover break-time duty, mentor new teachers, collate data about pupils’ attendance and behaviour, mark homework, rig lights and dress sets for school performances, order resources such as textbooks and classroom equipment, write newsletters, take school trips, assess pupil attainment, meet parents, spot potential terrorists (ahem) in accordance with the government’s Prevent guidelines, lead assemblies, make endless photocopies, and appraise other members of staff. This list is incomplete and already sounds like a lot for a piece of technology to cover. But if you’re looking for an easy and long-term job, this isn’t it: almost a third of teachers quit within five years.
It’s likely that some of the administrative tasks that teachers do will be conducted by technology in the future, just as in other sectors, but what about the actual teaching? The act of teaching isn’t just imparting what’s in your head to a captive audience. Teaching is a performance, it’s reading the room and working it. This is where technology really falls short. Empathy is a key area of difficulty for technology and automation. Are the kids at the back of the classroom bored because you’re talking about something they find too difficult, because they know it already, or because you’re not presenting the information in a meaningful way? Human beings are able to pick up on a multitude of contextual clues to determine and respond to the emotional states of others. Technology can’t detect emotional states, let alone adapt its behaviour to cater accordingly.
Another area of difficulty for technology that is key to teaching is quick thinking. Any number of things can and do go wrong on a school day: a guest speaker cancels, the whiteboard freezes, buses are delayed or – the ultimate horror – the photocopier breaks. Human beings are able to think on their feet and reformulate their plans to adapt to new circumstances. Machines aren’t able to do this. Thinking on the spot is a key skill of teachers, and many cite the variety of the job as a reason for entering the profession in the first place.
We know what technology can’t do for students and teachers, but there are some reasons to be optimistic about the role of technology in education. Teachers in the UK often complain about the administration workload interfering with the actual work of teaching. Technology could aid data-gathering significantly, freeing up teachers’ time and allowing them to focus on more important aspects of their work. And internationally, technology has the potential to reach those who don’t have access to a classroom. In 2015 the British Council used Skype to deliver teacher training in Libya; and as far back as 1999 Sugata Mitra created “Hole in the Wall” schools by placing computers in slums in Delhi.
The best teachers will use technology in the classroom as part of an expanding toolkit, and hopefully they’ll see the benefits of smarter technology in the form of reduced clerical work. Classrooms will continue to change shape, but it’s safe to assume that there will be a human teacher at the front of them for a long time yet.
Housing charity Shelter has calculated [pdf] that at least 1.4 million private renters in England, Scotland and Wales now have to claim housing benefit to help with the cost of their rent.
Research by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation on the 7 million Britons living in poverty found that housing costs have played a huge part in increasing poverty. The number of private renters living in poverty has doubled over the past decade, and there are now as many private renters in poverty as social renters.
For those who rent privately, the local housing allowance (LHA), a calculation method used in assessing housing benefit claims, determines how much help they are entitled to with housing rental costs. People are entitled to housing benefit if they are working or if they claim benefits.
LHA was introduced in 2008 by the last Labour government to bring the amount being spent on housing benefit for those renting privately in line with the benefit for those renting social housing. Labour capped the LHA at half local market rents. If tenants’ rent was more than that, they would not be reimbursed for the rent over that 50%.
In the coalition’s 2010 emergency budget, the terms were tightened:
From 2011, tenants under 35 living alone were either only entitled to housing benefit for the cheaper shared room rate or had to move into shared accommodation, with their own bedroom, but shared kitchens and bathrooms. Larger families that previously qualified for the five bedroom rate were now entitled to less housing benefit, both in terms of the lower calculation, and the demise of the five bedroom rate.
A new LHA cap and stricter terms were announced by the then-chancellor George Osborne in his autumn statement in November 2015. Initially brought in for a nine-month transition period that applied only to new tenancies, the new LHA cap and stricter terms now apply to all private tenancies signed after 7 April 2008.
There are limits on the amount of LHA tenants can get and any shortfall in rent must be met by the claimant. The maximum weekly LHA rate limits are:
This differs by area – for example in Lambeth, the maximum LHA payment for a room in shared accommodation is £94.38 a week, in Aberdeenshire the maximum rate is £75.63 a week, and in the Rhondda it is £46.03 a week.
In Southwark, where the LHA rate is set to a maximum of £204.08 a week for a one bedroom property, the maximum housing benefit awarded is £884 a month. A search on property listing site Rightmove shows only two one-bedroom flats available slightly under this rate, one of which specifies that potential occupants must earn a minimum of £23,850 a year.
Kate Webb, Shelter’s head of policy, says: “With housing costs so high and genuinely affordable homes in such short supply, many families have to rely on housing benefit to keep a roof over their heads, often scraping by from one month to the next. With the loss of a rented home the single biggest cause of homelessness, we’re worried that the lower benefit cap could mean even more families struggling to pay the rent and ultimately losing their homes.”
Shelter’s research found that with rents rising as much as 8% a year in some areas, the gap between local housing allowance rates and actual rents is considerable. The rates of local housing allowance have also been frozen for four years, from April 2016 to April 2020: real term rents are unlikely to fall, meaning there is no link between LHA and real term rents.
For tenants hit by rent shortfalls, the only way to avoid falling into arrears is to move to cheaper areas, apply for discretionary housing payments (a payment from the local authority for people who need extra help with housing costs) or to pay the extra rent from other earnings or benefits.
For many, this is difficult: some areas are unaffordable under LHA, but discretionary housing payments are meant to be short term and councils’ funds are finite. At the moment, people hit by the bedroom tax, benefit cap and LHA gap relay on the DHP payments; in expensive areas demand for the payments outstrips available funds. 
By 2020, Shelter predicts that there will be a gap between the cost of renting some of the cheapest properties and the maximum LHA support in 80% of the country:
Some areas are particularly hard hit, such as Cambridge, where the projected gap between LHA and rent is projected to rise to £529 a month by 2020, and Manchester, where the gap is projected to be £239. For households in these areas, the LHA gap is deepening their arrears, and opportunities to move are slim. 
Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing
Online shoppers will typically spend two-and-a-half hours sorting out a delivery problem this Christmas - because an item is late, turns up broken or doesn’t arrive at all – Citizens Advice has warned.
With the busiest shopping period of the year now under way, the national charity’s latest consumer advice trends report reveals people experienced 4.8m delivery problems last year –and spent 11.8m hours trying to sort them out. That is the equivalent of just under two-and-a-half hours per adult. 
Those who were subsequently not compensated were left £148m out of pocket – £30 a parcel – because of damaged or lost goods, hours wasted and time away from work, the charity said. It is advising shoppers that it is retailers’ responsibility to sort out delivery problems, not that of “third party” parcel companies.
Analysis of the more than 2,000 calls to Citizens Advice about deliveries in the past 12 months showed difficulty getting through to the delivery company was the most common problem, followed by confusion about responsibility and compensation and unexpected handling fees on parcels sent from outside the EU.
As many as 390m parcels will be handled by private companies and Royal Mail between November and December this year. Citizens Advice is preparing for a rise in people seeking help for problems with deliveries.
There was a 32% increase in calls about this issue between October and December 2015. And there was a 60% spike in people getting online help closer to Christmas on 18 December last year – as they try to track down missing gifts before the holiday.
“Shopping online should make people’s lives easier – but not if their items turn up damaged or don’t arrive at all” said Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice. “We’re expecting more people to seek our help over the festive season as consumers try to track down gifts or look to get compensation for items that are broken or never arrive. 
“It’s really important people know that if an item they’ve ordered doesn’t turn up – or if there is a problem with it – it is for the retailer to sort out. Businesses also need to make sure they are upholding people’s rights by looking into delivery problems themselves instead of passing customers onto the parcel companies.”
Consumers are advised that if they are posting a gift, they should keep hold of the receipt so they can claim compensation for the item if anything goes wrong. They also also need proof of sending which can be obtained from the Post Office or postal delivery company.
If valuables are being sent, Citizens Advice also recommends using an insured service such as Royal Mail’s Special Delivery or shopping around for another postal service. Their terms and conditions will explain what is and isn’t covered.
Ten months ago another driver damaged a vehicle I was hiring through Europcar in Northern Ireland. I reported it straight away and assumed it would be a simple process.
Two months later, after no communication from the company, Europcar wrote to inform me that as I had failed to respond to its requests for information my case had been closed. But I had received no such requests. I then received a letter saying it was still waiting to hear from the third-party insurers – it appears Europcar was closing my claim but continuing to claim the money off the third party.
I have chased continually and last month discovered that the other driver’s insurer had in fact accepted the claim, and authorised Europcar to refund me the £482 excess I had paid. Europcar keeps passing me from department to department and my emails generate only an automated response. I’ve still not received the money which was my savings for my 50th birthday treat to myself. SB, Bromley
How companies must dread customers like you who refuse to be stalled by that usually effective rebuffing strategy: silence! But what may have appeared to be 10 months of corporate indifference was, if Europcar is to be believed, deceptive, for behind the scenes staff were busy as beavers appointing lawyers to handle your claim. Usually, it tells me, it aims to settle such claims within eight weeks.
In your case it blames the Irish insurer who, according to a spokesperson, “failed to respond to numerous communications”. Europcar doesn’t explain why it failed to respond to numerous communications from you.
Liability was indeed accepted nine months later and the money paid to Europcar, but the latter forgot to pass it on. This, it says, was due to “genuine error”. You can thank your lucky stars you weren’t victim of a phoney error! The company has coughed up just in time for your birthday trip to New York and, to show it’s contrition, is adding the magnanimous sum of £50.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
The fact that this Mann Island building is called ‘iconic’ is presumably why such a monolith was allowed on a World Heritage Site. You’ll be turning would-be tenants away because of its position on Albert Dock, a walk from the city’s cultural, business and shopping districts. The flats open off a soaring atrium and come with underground parking, a concierge and a selection of restaurants. Annual returns on your cash investment are estimated to be higher than 18.2% and yields 7.2%. Prices start at £139,950 for a one-bedroom flat through Sequre Property Investment ; 0800 011 2277.
The challenges of caring for older people are growing as we live longer. By 2050 an estimated 83.7 million people in the US will be over 65, almost double 2012 figures.
As well as health concerns, there is an epidemic of loneliness among older people. A study of over 60s by the University of California, San Francisco found 43% of those surveyed felt lonely on a regular basis.
“We are failing our society at all ages – we’re failing children, we’re failing seniors as they retire,” says Steve Nygren, the co-founder and developer of Serenbe, a planned community of 500 residents on the outskirts of Atlanta, Georgia.
The aim of Serenbe is to tackle the social isolation people can experience as they age, either because they live in cities that are failing to meet the needs of older people, or because the retirement homes or communities they move into can leave them feeling cut off.
“In our research, we found that seniors want to live in multi-generational communities, they want to see kids in the street,” says Nygren.
The next stage in Serenbe’s evolution is the development of the Mado community, where life will centre around a 250,000 square foot complex filled with restaurants, offices for eastern and western medicine practitioners, and a Montessori school.
The community will feature homes of all sizes, some of which will be built around a communal guest house, to attract a range of demographics and encourage socialising. A dormitory-like residence is also planned, aiming to give older people proximity to neighbours, services and caregivers. And to monitor residents’ wellbeing, homes will be equipped with technologies including wearables and GPS.
From Kanazawa in Japan to Miss Sargfabrik in Vienna, Serenbe is part of a new wave of sustainable communities around the world, purpose-built with the aim of tackling loneliness and breaking the tendency to segregate older people.
On paper these communities seem utopian, but this kind of planned community may not be for everyone.
One of the key challenges is around affordability. House prices in Mado, for example, aren’t cheap, ranging from $300,000 (£236,000) to more than $1,000,000 (£786,000). Mado’s future developments, such as the dormitory-style dwelling, are expected to offer lower-income housing options but those plans are still a work in progress and housing costs are not yet available.
As well as financial cost, there is the issue of change. Older people are reluctant to relocate, says James Treggiari, executive director of Legal Assistance for Seniors, an Oakland, California-based nonprofit. “Even if you offer seniors a fancy house with more services, the vast majority would say ‘I’m good where I am’ … It’s so entwined in their identity.”
Research supports this theory: the most recent annual studies by the US government’s Administration on Aging found 80% of people 65 and older live in metropolitan areas and only 4% of older people moved in the past year, compared to 13% of under-65s.
A bigger question may be how to make existing urban communities more supportive.
Take San Francisco. Despite being home to a number of organisations working on issues of ageing, says Dr Karyn Skultety, vice president of health services at the Institute on Aging (IOA) in the city, it still struggles to meet older people’s needs, notably with high real estate costs leading to some being evicted, leaving the city or becoming homeless.
The city’s hilly geography means that transport is critically important, but competing needs from schools to homeless services to transportation makes allocating money for older people a challenge.
The IOA has had some success through partnering with the private sector. In August, the nonprofit announced that ride-hailing company Lyft would join in a three-way partnership with Whistlestop, a shuttle-van service for seniors. The partnership expands the ability for Whistlestop to get seniors to the IOA’s social day programmes, with Lyft providing wheelchair-accessible vehicles.
Lyft and its rival Uber have been criticised for overstating the benefits they offer to underserved communities but Skultety says the Lyft partnership shows the right way to develop senior services. “They’re curious about understanding this group of people that are not using their service and what they need.”
One organisation aiming to build a bridge between companies and seniors is Aging2.0, an initiative spanning 15 countries that brings together early-stage companies creating technologies to support older people.
Among the recently announced finalists of Aging2.0’s Global Startup Search awards is Silvernest, an online real estate service matching empty-nesters with rooms to let and baby boomers who want to live independently but not in isolation.
Other finalists include Mundo Prateado, a Brazil-based organisation dedicated to helping seniors remain active as they age, and NuEyes, which brings a Google Glass-like technology to the visually impaired.
“The story needs to be what can we do to keep people living independently,” says Stephen Johnston, co-founder of Aging2.0. “We need to do a better job of incorporating older people into our lives.”
A key problem is ensuring access to technology. “If you asked most [social service] agencies, they don’t see themselves as channels to sell products,” Johnston says. “There’s a broken economy here; we don’t have a functioning consumer marketplace so we’re not getting the innovations we need.”
Johnston is convinced smaller-scale local partnerships will build to ever-larger populations with access to new technologies, and eventually these innovations will become commonplace.
Until then, it’s a matter of reimagining older people’s place in society, something Nygren says is long overdue: “It’s not like creating spaces for seniors is a sacrifice, it’s about including seniors into a community for all the things they can bring, and to value their contributions.”
More than 7 million people in the UK are living in poverty despite being part of a working family, according to a study which uncovers how deprivation is increasingly linked to the high cost and insecurity of private rented accommodation.
The report, commissioned by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation (JRF) also found that disability is increasingly linked to the changing nature of poverty. If the costs of disability are taken into account, half of those in poverty are either disabled or living with a disabled person.
Overall poverty levels have remained flat since 2010, in part because of a general economic recovery, according to the study carried out by the New Policy Institute, which researches issues connected to poverty and housing.
However, it warns that much of this is down to steady economic growth. The JRF is urging the government to carefully monitor changes in poverty amid the repercussions of Brexit.
There were 13.5 million people living in households classified as poor in 2014-15, defined as below 60% of the median once housing costs are deducted. This is 21% of the UK population, a proportion barely changed in more than a decade.
However, the report found, 55% of those in poverty are now in working households, a record high. This comprises a total of 7.4 million people – 1.1 million more than in 2010-11 – among them 2.6 million children.
In contrast, there are 400,000 fewer pensioners in poverty from a decade ago, despite there being 1.7 million more people in that age bracket, the study, Monitoring Poverty and Social Exclusion 2016, reported.
A significant factor in these shifts, the study said, was the increased number of people living in expensive and insecure private rental properties, with the number of people in poverty in private lets doubling in a decade to 4.5 million.
“Failures in the housing market are a significant driver of poverty,” the study said. “This is primarily, but not entirely, due to costs.”
The number of all rental eviction has risen by 60% over five years to 37,000 annually, it said, with a particularly steep recent rise in private evictions. Over the same period mortgage repossessions have fallen from 23,000 to 3,300.
Among those in the bottom 20% of the income bracket who live in private rented homes, 73% pay more than a third of their income in rent, the report said, compared with 50% of social renters and 28% of owner occupiers who do so.
The number of private renters living in poverty has doubled over the past decade, the data showed, meaning there are now as many private renters in poverty as social renters.
Cuts to benefits were also identified as a factor in poverty. “Increasingly, the social security system does not cover the full cost of essentials for those on low incomes, such as rent and council tax,” the report said.
This was likely to get worse with the reduction in the overall benefit cap, the authors said, with 112,000 families expected to experience a reduction in income because of the cap, up from the current 20,000.
The report also found significant regional differences, with high rental costs seemingly playing a role in this. London and south-east England, where housing costs have risen in recent years, has the highest poverty rate at 27%, 6% above the UK average.
Any overall increase in poverty levels has been held off in part by record employment levels, the report noted, with the figure of 1.4 million children living in workless households being the lowest recorded.
But much more needed to be done, said Helen Barnard, the head of analysis at the JRF. “The UK economy is not working for low-income families,” she said. “The economy has been growing since 2010 but during this time high rents, low wages and cuts to working-age benefits mean that many families, including working households, have actually seen their risk of poverty grow.
“As it negotiates Brexit, it is vital that the government does not allow its focus to slip from the domestic concerns that make a huge difference to people who are just about managing. This report shows that people on low incomes cannot rely on economic growth and rising employment alone to improve their financial prospects.”
A spokeswoman for the Department for Work and Pensions said: “Since 2010, the number of people living in poverty has fallen by 300,000, but we know there’s more to do. We’re increasing the national living wage and taking millions of people out of income tax, to make sure it always pays to be in work.”
However, Debbie Abrahams, the shadow work and pensions secretary, said the report showed “the true impact of six wasted years of Tory austerity, with 7.4 million people in poverty in working households”.
She added: “This government has no plan to tackle stagnant wages and rising insecurity, choosing instead to make the poorest pay for their economic mismanagement.”
Brief letters: Agency working conditions | South African political parties | Zac Goldsmith’s legacy | Time man of the year | Arts sponsorship | The new Keith Flett
The exploitation of agency workers (Agency workers ‘exploited and forgotten’, 5 December) has even spread to the Ministry of Justice which employs court interpreters through an agency. The MoJ can book me for a full day’s work but should the case be adjourned or cancelled when I show up, I will only be paid little more than an hour’s pay, putting the cost of cancellation or curtailment on me, the interpreter. What hope is there for agency workers’ conditions if even the MoJ colludes in this bad practice?
Name and address supplied
• Your obituary of the admirable anti-apartheid activist Walter Hain (5 December) is marred by the assertion the Liberal party was the only non-race-based political grouping in South Africa. Our sister party, the South African Communist party, has a powerful claim to be the political party that forged the strongest multi-racial unity.
Nick Wright
Communist party media office, London
• I don’t think your readers and columnists should be too hard on Zac Goldsmith. After all, he did keep his promise, thus becoming the first MP to keep a promise in the recorded history of parliamentary democracy.
Alan Sillitoe
London
• Adolf Hitler, Man of the Year, 1938, Time magazine (Nigel Farage shortlisted for Time magazine’s person of the year award, theguardian.com, 5 December).
Felix Bellaby
Hollingsclough, Staffordshire
• Did no one tell Peter Gelb, director of the Metropolitan Opera, that Texaco sponsored the broadcasts of the company’s matinees for more than 60 years (Banks and oil giants should keep out of temples of culture, shouldn’t they?, G2, 5 December)? 
Ciarán O’Meara
London
• Two letters from Jill Wallis on the same day (6 December)! Look out, Flett, she’s gunning for you.
Bob Horn
Cranleigh, Surrey
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
When it debuted in 1989, the MicroTAC was hailed as a “game-changer”, one that Motorola argued would bring mobile phones out of the hands of top execs and into the hands of senior mid-level execs. Competively priced at $2,995, the size of a Dutch brick rather than the preceding concrete breezeblock, it had an amazing half-hour’s talk time with only 10 hours of charging.
The price has dropped a bit, but at £100 on eBay, the likes of the MicroTAC still hold value for collectors. New research by Talkmobile highlights how the market for vintage phones has become increasingly lively as collectors aim to snap up a brick of tech history.
Before they start cropping up on Antiques Roadshow, here are 10 landmark phones and what they’re changing hands for online this year:
The elder brother to the MicroTAC, and Gordon Gekko’s handset of choice, the DynaTAC, released in 1984, pretty much invented all those 80s cliches.
The Volkswagen Beetle of phones. You’ve definitely got two of these and thrown three away. Released in 2000, it went on to sell 126m units, and is so popular it is now one of three “national emojis” for Finland.
Released in 1981, the Senator is hailed as one of the first truly mobile phones – if by mobile you mean “can be plugged into your car and weighs 10kg”.
It may have only had a now-piddly 4G or 8G of memory but, because of increased processing, 2007’s original iPhone still stacks up with today’s phones when it comes to battery life while browsing.
The first clamshell phone, and the first to sell more than 60m units. Weighing in at only 88g, this 1996 unit heralded the birth of the mass-consumer phone.
In 2004, Motorola released the definitive handset of the clamshell era – the thinnest of its genus, it also boasted a sporty “electroluminescent” keyboard.
Street value: £15-£60. But the Dolce & Gabanna tie-in model will set you back £150.
Featuring breakthroughs of “video editing, picture blogging, web gallery uploading”, Sony Ericsson’s sturdy W880i defined 2006’s proto-smartphone era – when music and photos suddenly became the chief selling points of everyone’s next handset.
The same year that Apple was debuting the iPhone, Nokia’s N95 was giving it a run for its money. An early adopter of the accelerometer, it was utterly eclipsed by Apple’s entry, but has since been widely heralded as a lost classic.
An early Android hit in 2012, the innovative tech in HTC’s breakthrough paved the way for them to be the handset manufacturers to Google’s 2016 Pixel.
The original “fold-out keyboard” unit attempted an obvious solution to a common problem, pre-predictive text. First seen on-screen in The Saint reboot in 1997, it is also referenced in Brett Easton Ellis’s brand-mad Glamorama.
The Financial Conduct Authority has studied a sample of spread-betting customers and found that 82% lost money on products offered by the industry called contracts for difference (CFDs). Is the regulator correct?
The FCA’s figure is broadly accurate, but it is not a new development. The ratio of losers to winners – about 80% of customers have always lost money – has long been financial spread betting’s dirty little secret.
That might not be a problem if their products were being sold as a form of leisure, in the same way that you may have an occasional flutter on the Grand National. But watching financial markets is nowhere near as much fun as watching sport and its complexity makes cricket’s Duckworth-Lewis method seem like a GCSE maths question.
So financial spread betting has to be marketed as an investment product. For the vast majority – the dentists and teachers dabbling with the equity and currency markets – it has never been anything close to that.
Why do most customers lose?
There are a few reasons, but the main one is that predicting the future is really difficult, even for professionals. It is rare to get a City fund manager who consistently outperforms the market over the long run, so what chance has the dentist from Dumbarton or the teacher from Truro got?
Secondly, the way these bets are structured puts the gambler at a disadvantage. For example, while there are no fees on a trade, you buy and sell shares depending on a “spread” around the actual price.
A share trading at 100p may need to be bought at 101p, from which your winnings and losses are calculated. If the share goes up by 1p, you would win nothing. If it goes down by a penny, you would lose 2p a share – or two times your stake.
Thirdly, buying shares in the traditional manner may provide an investor with an income via a dividend, which would need to be factored into any profit calculation. There are no dividends with spread betting.
Why do so many financial spread-betting companies sponsor football and rugby clubs?
It is not just sporting teams. The industry advertises heavily in all sorts of areas, especially the financial media, and runs educational courses to help improve its clients’ trading (which a cynic would say are really marketing events to tempt punters into betting for longer).
The reason for this effort stems from the ratio of losers to winners. If you are betting on a football match and lose, there is still a chance that you enjoyed the game (and the bet might have enhanced the entertainment).
The same has never been true of the financial markets, so if you are not winning, the betting soon becomes extremely tiresome. That means there are always a huge amount of spread-betting customers who quit, forcing companies to continually search for new customers.
But if people stop spread betting as soon as they realise they are losing money, is it really that dangerous?
That depends. You can lose a little over a long period of time, get bored of it and quit, and that should not be hugely damaging.
However, because spread betting can cause a customer to lose a lot more than their stake, they can end up with large debts if a market moves swiftly against them.
That is what happened in January 2015, when the Swiss national bank scrapped the €1.20 ceiling for the Swiss franc against the euro, which had been introduced in September 2011 to prevent the “Swissie” from surging in value. Amateur traders ended up with five-figure debts.
How can you lose more than you stake?
This is because spread betting is a leveraged product: you borrow money to make larger bets than you could otherwise afford.
Let’s take shares in a fictional airline called Speedy Jet, which trade at about £1 each. With conventional share buying, if you want to own £1,000 of the airline’s shares, you need to buy 1,000 of them and pay the money upfront.
On a spread bet, you would place a bet of £10 per point to give you the same exposure. So if Speedy Jet shares rise by a penny – equivalent to a point – you would win £10, just as on the share trade.
However, the difference with a spread bet is that you would only need a fraction of £1,000 to take this position. So, for example, opening a £10 per point spread bet on Speedy Jet may require an initial deposit of £50 (at a 5% deposit rate), rather than the £1,000 upfront if you had bought the shares.
That allows customers to make larger bets than they might, which can work both ways. If Speedy Jet shares go up by 20p, you have risked £50 to win £200 (20 points x £10). But the reverse is also true. If the shares lose 20p, you will have lost £200 – four times your stake.
The FCA said people were sometimes able to have leverage of 200 times, meaning they can take a £20,000 position with a £100 deposit.
Even rocket scientists, I would wager, are befuddled by airline pricing. One minute, a flight you’re looking at costs £400; 30 seconds later it has increased by £100. Panic sets in; you buy a ticket before it ascends out of your price range.
I experienced this fluctuation frustration recently while trying to buy a ticket home to London from New York for Christmas. After about a gazillion visits to British Airways’ website, I decided finally to book something. Immediately, the price went up. That’s OK, I thought, trying to console myself. I read on Twitter that London has gone all Islamic anyway and Christmas has been banned. Probably nothing to go home to any more, just ritual stonings and sharia. Then I remembered a rumour that clearing your browser cookies could get you a cheaper flight. I gave it a go and, voila, the flight reverted to its earlier, cheaper price.
The thinking behind the cookies trick is that airlines can tell from your browser history when you’re particularly interested in a flight – and thus willing to pay a higher price – and take advantage of this. Whether this is true is known only to a few (when the Guardian asked BA about this in 2010, it said it didn’t use cookies in this way). What is clear, however, is that airlines – and many other companies – are increasingly moving towards “personalised pricing”. Sometimes called “differential pricing” or “price discrimination”, this means charging customers different prices for the same product based on how much they think people are willing to pay.
Price discrimination, to be clear, is not the same as “dynamic pricing”. Airlines have practised dynamic pricing for a long time: there are a set number of prices available, and you get a different fare based on factors including when you book and the availability of seats on the flight. Prices, however, are starting to get more personal. In 2014, a US regulator approved an industry-wide system, the implementation of which started only recently, that allows airlines and travel agencies to collect personal data – information such as marital status, address and travel history – and use that data to offer you “more agile pricing and more personalised offerings”. So, if an airline can see that you live in a fancy neighbourhood and regularly fly business-class, it may offer you a higher fare than it would someone whom it believes is more price-sensitive. As technology grows more sophisticated, companies may be able to serve you higher prices based on factors such as your emotional state.
Businesses are already using customised pricing online based on information they can glean about you. It is hard to know how widespread the practice is; companies keep their pricing strategies closely guarded and are wary of the bad PR price discrimination could pose. However, it is clear that a number of large retailers are experimenting with it. Staples, for example, has offered discounted prices based on whether rival stores are within 20 miles of its customers’ location. Office Depot has admitted to using its customers’ browsing history and location to vary its range of offers and products. A 2014 study from Northeastern University found evidence of “steering” or differential pricing at four out of 10 general merchandise websites and five out of five travel websites. (Steering is when a company doesn’t give you a customised price, but points you towards more expensive options if it thinks you will pay more.) The online travel company Orbitz raised headlines in 2012 when it emerged that the firm was pointing Mac users towards higher-priced hotel rooms than PC users.
Price discrimination doesn’t happen only online. Supermarkets have used personalised pricing based on information gleaned from loyalty cards and shopping habits. Broadly speaking, economists tend to think of price discrimination as a good thing for businesses and customers. Essentially, it is algorithms robbing from the rich to subsidise the poor, all while growing a company’s market.
There is the potential for this to go further still and for customised pricing to help reduce some of the inequities in society. In Finland, speeding tickets are linked to income, a system known as progressive punishment. Could we not have progressive pricing, a system where the cost of necessities such as bread and milk is linked to your ability to pay for them?
However, it seems more likely that companies will exploit the increasing amounts of data they have about us to our detriment. Take Uber, for example. Its much-hated “surge pricing” is an example of dynamic pricing: prices change according to supply and demand. They don’t change according to how desperate you, as an individual, are to get a cab, but this may not be the case for long. Uber knows a hell of a lot about you – including, for example, how low the battery is on your phone. It also has data that shows people are more likely to pay surge pricing when their phone battery is low. “We absolutely don’t use that ... but it’s an interesting kind of psychological fact of human behaviour,” a behavioural economist at Uber said earlier this year. This may be true, but why do you think Uber employs behavioural economists? It is not simply to marvel at the psychology of human behaviour.
As airlines become more adept at gathering and exploiting data, I shudder to think what “interesting facts” of human behaviour they will start to factor into their pricing strategies. Fares will stop being linked to variables such as seats already sold and start fluctuating according to how many times your mum has texted you to ask if you’ve bought your ticket yet, and how guilty you feel that you haven’t. Good luck trying to clear your cookies to fix that.
Stealing. Most dictionaries define “steal” as some variation of “taking another person’s property without permission or legal right, and with no intention to return it”. You can steal a wide range of things from someone, and you can even do it metaphorically (“stolen my heart”, anyone?). But how do you steal someone’s job?
A job isn’t property in the strictest sense. It’s not a possession, a thing we can own. If anything, it’s more of an agreement. “I’ll do this service for you, and you’ll give money to me in return”. Is it possible to steal an agreement?
The Daily Mail seems to think so at least. With their latest front page, they loudly warn of 15 million jobs being stolen by robots. This adds even further levels of confusion into already questionable territory. Even if it were possible to steal a job, could a robot do that? It’s not exactly a new or invalid concern, jobs being lost to automation, but actual theft? Can you really accuse a complex-but-inanimate machine of actively and illegally taking something that belongs to you? Seems unlikely, for the same reason that, after a traffic accident, the cars involved are never arrested. Because that would be farcical.
But let’s assume it’s a human who’s accused of stealing a job. It invariably is, and it’s usually immigrants, no matter where you are. But let’s take that at face value. Assume an immigrant did genuinely want to steal your job. They want to take your job from you, illegitimately, and against your will. How would they go about doing that? In theory, they’d have to somehow prevent you from turning up at your work, start doing your job in your stead (without anyone objecting) and then alter your employment contract so it says their name, rather than yours. And your employers would have to go along with this, or be powerless to prevent it.
At the risk of being dismissive of people’s concerns, you’d have to wonder why somebody with the skill to do all that would have either the need or desire to take your job in the first place. They’re clearly destined for better things. The point is, by its very nature a job isn’t something that can really be stolen, as we’d understand the term.
There are, admittedly, a few debatable scenarios. A co-worker unfairly takes credit for your efforts and gets a promotion that should rightly have gone to you, or someone in line to replace you spreads malicious rumours about you and gets you fired, then assumes your role. These are situations where your job could be said to be “stolen”, although while the culprits have clearly done something immoral, whether they’ve acted illegally is far less certain. But these are very specific situations, not applicable to the wider workforce in general.
But… so what? So it’s not logically possible to “steal” a job. A job can still be lost, sacrificed, moved overseas, or a variety of other things. Because of the way our society is structured, and the ever-increasing condemnation and scrapping of help for those without one, losing a job is one of the more stressful things that a human can experience outside of actual trauma. And thanks to our powerful cognitive abilities, humans can be stressed by things they perceive as being threatening, whether they are or not. Basically, people can be stressed out by the possibility of losing their job, before it actually happens.
Taking all this into account, isn’t it somewhat patronising to quibble over use of the term “stealing” in this context? Where’s the harm in a little colourful language when people’s livelihoods are at stake?
This would be a valid point if it was just a harmless bit of hyperbole. But it may well not be. The language we use, especially if repeated and applied constantly in very noticeable ways, can directly impact how we think and perceive things. Consider the difference between refugee, immigrant and asylum seeker; these terms, although different in meaning, are often used interchangeably, depending on the impression the speaker wants to give. A refugee, for example, is a victim of circumstance. But an asylum seeker? They want something, so you don’t feel so guilty about rejecting them.
So, if you lose your job, that’s bad. You now need to do something about it, whatever that may be. You may look at why you lost your job, and seek out answers, answers that may not be comfortable to hear, for yourself or those who employed you. But if your job was stolen? Well, that’s definitely not your fault. The job that you’re entitled to (for some unspecified reason) has been wrongly taken from you. It’s not your employers fault either, it’s the evil person/people who had the front to steal your job. They’re the ones you should be angry at, you’re just the victim here.
That’s why it’s bad. It prevents the individual affected from effective self-assessment and allows them the luxury of victim mentality, a potentially-toxic and self-limiting mindset that harms both the individual and others in the long term. It also lets the employers off the hook. It’s not their fault, they didn’t want to give your job to some foreigner, but it was stolen. Nothing they can do, sorry.
In truth, it’s invariably the employers who are responsible. A capitalist society obeying free market rules means businesses will employ those who they can get away with paying the least, and if certain people can and will work for less money, they’ll get the jobs. You may not like it, but that’s capitalism for you.
Saying jobs are being “stolen”, rather than deliberately given to those who can be paid the least by the rich and powerful who award them in the first place, distorts the reality of the situation in clever and subtle ways. It keeps those who lose out focussed in the wrong place, and lets those responsible off the hook.
Dean Burnett will continue to churn out these blogs until he’s replaced by a software programme. His book The Idiot Brain, is available now in the UK, USA, Canada and many other countries.
The Brexit vote will lead to a slump in office construction, with up to half of planned developments in central London likely to be postponed or scrapped in coming years, according to estate agent Savills.
Commercial development has barely recovered from the post-financial crisis slump, and the uncertainty surrounding the terms of Britain’s departure from the EU will trigger another 30% to 40% decline across the country in the next five years, Savills said in its annual forecasts. Central London will be worst hit.
Its report said: “The seismic shock of the Brexit vote brought transactional activity in many cases to a juddering halt, a pause at least to reconsider pricing as opposed to pulling out of deals.”
Several commercial property funds suspended trading in the summer to stop withdrawals from panicking investors fearing a collapse in property values, but all funds have since re-opened.
Worried about the impact of Brexit on the City, banks are considering moving operations to mainland Europe and there have been warnings that 100,000 jobs could go if London loses its ability to process euro-denominated transactions. This would sharply reduce demand for new office space.
Savills is predicting a 4% fall in UK office prices next year followed by a 1% drop in 2018. Thereafter it forecasts a slow return to growth, pencilling in price increases of 1.1% in 2019, 2.5% in 2020 and 3.2% in 2021. This translates into 1.6% growth over the five-year period.
Mat Oakley, head of UK & European commercial research at Savills, said: “In London offices we have seen about a 5% fall this year, and there is probably another 2% to 3% to go – assuming we get a reasonably soft Brexit.”
The gloomy predictions come a week after the City’s biggest tower, 1 Undershaft, received planning permission. The developer, Singapore-based Aroland Holdings, says it will house 10,000 workers. Another tower at 22 Bishopsgate has also been given the green light. The developer, French-owned fund management firm Axa, had warned before the referendum that that it might pull out in the event of a Brexit vote, but decided to push ahead in October.
Oakley said there had been an increase in overseas investors piling into London offices and other UK commercial assets since the June referendum, all attracted by the weaker pound. As domestic investors are in retreat, the proportion of foreign buyers is about to rise to a record high of about 60% between October and December, up from a recent average of 42%.
While the Brexit vote came as a shock in June, other events such as the election of Donald Trump in the US and the upcoming elections in France and Germany next year meant that the UK is regarded as somewhat less risky than before, he added.
With London property so expensive, investors from the Middle East have been hunting for cheaper deals outside the capital, in places such as Birmingham, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Bristol.
The Savills report said: “Lower levels of domestic demand, particularly at larger lot sizes will give non-domestic investors a clearer playing field.” The next five years are likely to experience record levels of international investment in commercial property outside London, ranging from office blocks to shopping centres, warehouses and data centres.
Mark Ridley, chief executive of Savills UK and Europe, said: “The sterling devaluation has made UK property very attractive for international investors pegged to the dollar or euro, with 2017 activity in central London likely to be dominated by Asian investors, with American and pan-European investors also strong nationally.”
Sterling has lost 13% of its value against the dollar since the referendum and is down almost 9% against the euro. At one stage it had lost almost 20% of its value.
Another draw for foreign investors is that they continue to be taxed in the same way as UK buyers, unlike countries such as the US which have imposed extra non-dom taxes.
Savills also sees an end to the post-credit crunch house price boom, forecasting that residential prices will flatline next year after five years of increases. London’s luxury property market has been hit in particular, as Brexit uncertainty and increased stamp duty have been putting off foreign buyers.
Lucian Cook, head of residential research at Savills, noted that there had been a shift in housing policy under housing and planning minister Gavin Barwell, with a bigger emphasis on building more homes across a wider range of tenures such as homes for rent. But a representative from Church Commissioners, who manage the Church of England’s £7bn investment fund, suggested that Cook was painting too rosy a picture.
Brits dreaming of a winter getaway in the sun could make their pounds go further in a handful of foreign destinations despite the sharp fall in the pound since the Brexit vote.
Sterling has fallen against 46 of the 50 most common global currencies in 2016, but a pound is worth more than it was a year ago in Mexico, Argentina, Venezuela and Egypt, according to travel money specialist No1 Currency.
Simon Phillips, retail director, said: “Sterling began 2016 on a roll but has struggled badly since June’s EU referendum. Despite recovering a little in recent months, the pound is still well down against many of the most popular foreign currencies. As a result, more holidaymakers are considering destinations further afield where their pounds will go further.”
The British pound is up 86% against the Egyptian pound, 32% against the Argentinian peso, 29% against the Venezuelan bolivar, and 3% against the Mexican peso compared with last December.
At the other end of the scale, the pound has plunged 30% against the Icelandic krona, making a trip to see the northern lights costlier this Christmas.
Sterling has also fallen 18% against the US dollar and the euro, making popular destinations across the Atlantic and on the continent less affordable for British holidaymakers.
More than £1bn has been wiped off the stock market value of the spread-betting industry after the City regulator announced a clampdown to protect inexperienced retail customers from unexpected losses on complex trades.
The Financial Conduct Authority said it was concerned about people opening online accounts with spread-betting providers without understanding the products they were trading. A representative sample of customer accounts found that 82% lost an average of £2,200 on the products, known as contracts for difference (CFDs).
The regulator proposed a series of measures to protect consumers, including standardised risk warnings, compulsory disclosure of total profit-loss ratios across all clients, limits on trading using small amounts of capital and banning companies from using bonuses to tempt people to start trading.
Shares in publicly traded spread-betting companies plunged after the announcement. Shares in IG Group, the biggest operator, plummeted by 32% to 532p, wiping more than £900m off its value.
IG said some companies’ marketing of CFDs fell short of appropriate standards and the FCA’s proposals could be good for customers. The proposals did not appear to apply to firms offering CFDs from outside the UK, where standards are often lax, it said.
CMC Markets dropped by 30% to 125p, cutting its market value by more than £160m. Founded and run by Peter Cruddas, the Brexit backer and former Conservative party treasurer, CMC floated on the stock market in February at 240p a share and has since lost more than 45% of its value. The fall knocked about £90m off the value of Cruddas’s 57% stake in the company.
AIM-listed Plus500 lost 28%, or £160m, as its shares tumbled to 388p, and shares in Playtech, which makes gambling software, also fell.
CFDs are derivative products that allow people to gamble on price movements in shares, commodities and currencies without owning them. Customers can increase the size of their trades by putting down a small amount of capital to maximise potential gains and losses.
A leverage ratio of 100:1 lets someone take a £10,000 position with a £100 deposit. The FCA proposed limiting leverage to 25:1 in a customer’s first year of trading and 50:1 for more experienced consumers.
The potential losses for spread-betters were demonstrated in January 2015 when the Swiss central bank unexpectedly removed the cap on the franc’s value against the euro.
IG said at the time the move could cost it as much as £30m after customers with no means of paying racked up thousands of pounds of losses from betting against the franc. IG also took a hit by closing customer positions at worse prices than it was able to get in the market.
The number of companies authorised by the FCA for retail CFD business has roughly doubled to 97 since 2010. The longest-established companies started in the 1970s and 80s by offering bets to relatively knowledgeable clients, but there are now about 125,000 active UK customers and 400,000 based overseas, with a total of £3.5bn on deposit with providers.
Christopher Woolard, the FCA’s director of strategy and competition, said: “We have serious concerns that an increasing number of retail clients are trading in CFD products without an adequate understanding of the risks involved, and as a result can incur rapid, large and unexpected losses.
“We are introducing stricter rules for CFD products to ensure the sector addresses the shortcomings identified and firms make sure that retail clients are aware of the high risks involved in trading these complex products.”
The FCA has been examining the industry since July 2015. In February, it told companies to do more to protect customers from losses after finding that checks on their suitability and warnings about risk were inadequate.
Jake Green, a partner at law firm Ashurst, said the regulator’s proposals showed it was intervening in products, rather than enforcing good conduct, which could lead to some companies folding or being taken over.
“This will come as a shock to the UK industry, which received detailed briefings from the FCA earlier in this year, where this was not indicated,” he said.
The FCA has asked the industry and other interested parties for comments on its proposals by 7 March 2017.
The first evidence has emerged that the era of record-low fixed-rate mortgages may be coming to an end after HSBC withdrew its “cheapest-ever” deal and increased rates on other products.
HSBC had been offering a mortgage that allowed customers to lock in for two years at a rate of 0.99%, but this deal has been pulled with immediate effect. The bank’s new mortgage offers are coming in at up to 0.5% higher.
The move follows warnings from mortgage brokers that a number of factors, including Donald Trump’s US election win, were set to push up the cost of new fixed-rate home loans.
David Hollingworth at broker London & Country Mortgages said: “The bottom of the market may have been hit. This [announcement] and the broader changes from HSBC, which has been very aggressively priced in the fixed-rate market, could spell the end of the sub-1% fixed rate, but also signals a potential turning point for fixed mortgage rates.”
HSBC’s 0.99% deal was launched in June this year and was the cheapest on the market, as well as the lowest ever recorded by financial information firm Moneyfacts. 
The deal emerged at a time when competition among lenders had been hotting up, reflecting the fact that the cost of borrowing for banks and building societies had fallen to new lows.
A HSBC spokesman said: “When the cost of funding comes down we are always quick to pass on the benefit to customers, and we have been able to do that for almost six months with our 0.99% rate mortgage. The cost of funding has gone up over the last month or so and we have had to reflect that in our recent pricing review.
“We regularly review our rates, and while they still provide good value for those looking to move on to or up the housing ladder, should the cost of funding come back down you can be sure we will reflect that with some great deals.”
Last month, the Council of Mortgage Lenders said home loan affordability had reached a “historic low” for both first-time buyers and home movers. It added that in September, first-time buyers spent an average of just 17.8% of their monthly household income on mortgage repayments – partly reflecting August’s interest rate cut from 0.5% to 0.25%. Meanwhile, according to Moneyfacts, the average five-year fix fell below 3% for the first time on record.
But more recently swap rates – what the banks pay to borrow from one other, which play a large part in determining the pricing of fixed-rate mortgages – have increased sharply, a trend which accelerated in the days following Trump’s win.
Economists believe the president-elect’s promises of tax cuts and a $550bn boost to infrastructure spending will force the Federal Reserve, the US central bank, to raise interest rates more rapidly than had been expected. In recent weeks, UK mortgage brokers have warned that this was translating into upwards pressure on fixed-rate mortgage pricing.
HSBC has now announced it is “increasing the rates of all fixed-rate products by between 0.1%-0.5%”, and is removing the 0.99% “special rate”. Its two-year fixed-rates now start at 1.29%. However, no changes are being made to variable rates.
Hollingworth said: “The 0.99% fixed-rate has been something of a poster boy for the record low rates that borrowers have been enjoying. Borrowers that have held off hoping that rates could fall further may not want to delay much more … Higher swap rates could result in rates drifting up, though the good news is that the competition in the market continues to offer some sharp rates.”
Challenger bank Atom has just launched in the mortgage market, its two-year fixed-rates reportedly starting at 1.19%.
In September we hired a car from Avis in Perugia, Italy, but we reversed the car into a water hydrant in the hotel car park causing some damage.
We were advised by Avis at the airport that we would receive an email to inform us of the cost of a repair prior to any money being deducted from my husband’s credit card. We had taken out extra insurance in the UK to cover the excess after reading an article in the Guardian about just this eventuality.
We lodged a claim with insurance4carhire. Our credit card bill shows that Avis had taken £420 from our card. However, they have not sent the receipt, and without it insurance4carhire says we can’t claim.
I have been ringing Avis every week to be told each time that they will “urgently” email Italy to obtain said information but nothing has happened.
Another week, another car hire problem. This was, at least, easy to resolve. A call to Avis UK’s office may not have resulted in a explanation but it has now sent you the invoice.
You did the right thing buying the third party insurance, even though it may not feel like it right now.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
If like me you’re female, Muslim and from an ethnic minority background, it sometimes feels like a one-way ticket into economic and social purgatory.
Despite the fact that more British Muslim women than men are getting degrees, we are the most disenfranchised group in the country. Not only are we subject to high levels of unemployment and poverty, but discrimination on the basis of our faith, gender and ethnic background hinders our entry into the labour market.
However, according to the findings of Louise Casey’s review of integration and opportunity released yesterday, it’s not discrimination that is holding us back. British Muslim women have apparently failed to grasp that integration is the missing “key to success”.
If only it were that simple. The triple whammy that Muslim women face is what really makes for stagnant social mobility. Casey’s report suggests that the UK needs a major new strategy focused on promoting the English language and British values and social mixing among young people. While language proficiency can be a barrier to integration, being a first-generation immigrant with limited proficiency in English doesn’t necessarily mean your children won’t become engaged members of the community. My grandmother, a first-generation British-Pakistani woman who cannot speak a word of English, raised my mother and eight other daughters, all of whom speak fluent English – and Pashto, to boot.
Talk of “women’s emancipation in communities where they are being held back by regressive cultural practices” is merely a synonym for “Muslim women need saving”. Yes, patriarchy is indeed a problem within the Muslim community, but it is by no means exceptional. On the one hand, Muslim women are required to do more to integrate, and on the other we’re paragons of victimhood. Which is it?
The fact we are even discussing “integration”, as if the Muslim community were an oddly assembled jigsaw puzzle incongruous with wider society, is troubling. The mono-ethnic wards the report refers to, in Pakistani and Bangladeshi Muslim communities in Bradford, have been highlighted as barriers to integration. But what exactly is the solution? A “brown flight” is hardly possible when people are struggling to pay their council tax, let alone move out of the area. I have lived in Bradford for eight years, although I had the benefit of spending most of my life in the kingdom of cosmopolitanism that is London. Just because I won’t leave the predominantly Muslim, Pakistani ward that I live in now doesn’t make me averse to integration. I simply don’t have the financial means to do it.
Graduating from university last year, I thought, naively perhaps, that my degree would ease my passage into the labour market. But instead of a gold-paved road to my first job, I found myself hurtling down the rabbit hole of unemployment. And I’m not alone. I’ve watched many friends, Pakistani Muslim women like me, get sucked into a void of hopelessness as they try to crack the job market. They lose confidence, not because of the shackles of their faith and their unwillingness to integrate, but because of the economic struggles, discrimination and gradual erosion of self-worth they have experienced.
Bradford is a city that has been battered by austerity cuts. Bradford West, where I live, is the joint fourth poorest constituency in the country. At least once a month, I make a four-and-a-half-hour commute to the economic promised land of London to build my experience through unpaid internships in the hope of eventually finding work. Two years of commuting between the two is exhausting. The voluntary positions, occasional freelance work and below-minimum-wage positions were amounting to nothing. The lack of job opportunities and constant rejections have finally prompted me to pack up and join an exodus of graduates relocating to London.
There’s also an assumption that in a city such as Bradford, with its large south Asian, Muslim demographic, Islamophobia isn’t felt there. But it is. The 326% spike in Islamophobic attacks in 2015, over half of which were directed towards visibly Muslim women, and the glare of the media spotlight after two families from Bradford left to join Islamic State, means fear is once again as tangible for British Muslims – wherever in the country they live – as it was following 9/11 and the 7/7 bombings. The murder of the Labour MP Jo Cox only a few miles away is a manifestation of this fear of the “other”.
There is a great emphasis in the report on attaching “more weight to British values, laws and history in our schools”. But what exactly are “British values”? Fish and chips? The monarchy? A quintessentially British cup of tea?
Through mentoring work I do with primary school children in Bradford, I do see hope for the future. I see charismatic, intuitive young girls who are raring to take over the world, even if some need a little nudge. But the dreams and ambitions of many of Bradford’s young women eventually ebb away once they realise the ladder of social mobility is out of reach for them. Instead of framing the discussion around integration, real and tangible efforts need to be made to actually help Muslim women.
The fact that we even have to talk about our Muslim identities, our anxieties surrounding issues of poverty and employment in an attempt to humanise our struggle and reassure people we are “good Muslims”, not “Isis Muslims”, is demoralising. Economic and class struggles affect Muslims just as they affect anyone else, and divisive talk that centres on integration only undermines the struggles of British Muslim women from ethnic minority backgrounds and whitewashes the policies that hold them down.
The glass ceiling has many layers for British Muslim women. If we refuse to march to the drumbeat of victimhood, we will have to work twice as hard as our white counterparts to secure a job, and it’s not just because of the lack of opportunities. It’s also because of discrimination and the persistent idea that we live “parallel lives” in a parallel dimension yet to be discovered by Stephen Hawking. This is particularly true for visibly Muslim women like me who wear the hijab. The media’s fetishisation of the piece of cloth wrapped around my head means my sartorial choices are up for public discussion, whether I want that to be the case or not.
If the government really wants to help British Muslim women, it needs to take discrimination seriously: create job opportunities across the country; invest in stagnating cities such as Bradford with so many talented women resigned to mediocre jobs for which they are overqualified, or no jobs at all. Create platforms from which Muslim women can ascend the ladder of social mobility.
Once that’s done, then we can talk about integration – but I bet we won’t need to.
A year since Whirlpool issued safety alert, Which? says customers subjected to slow and inadequate service
Like many of my friends, I remember the evening I told my parents I wanted to go to college. We all have different stories about the moment we took control of our lives. But what we share is this: by signing on a dotted line to incomprehensible terms, we risked everything. We chose education, no matter the cost. In some cases, we alienated ourselves from our families and communities.
By spending money we didn’t have to attend schools we couldn’t afford, we joined an elite class we’d never truly fit into. We are, in a way, without community. As a result of pursuing higher education, I am highly educated and deeply in debt. If you don’t have a similar story of adversity – and you’re not in debt – you’re probably not my friend.
I grew up in a working-class neighborhood outside Cleveland, Ohio, where I was taught that if only I followed the rules, I could succeed. I was so good a student that a guidance counselor suggested Antioch College, a prestigious yet expensive liberal arts school. My mom made it her mission that I attend. She saw that I entered every high school essay contest and applied for every merit-based scholarship that I could. That same year, my father had skipped out on us; I was now 18, and he was legally absolved of all financial responsibility.
With my mother’s help, I paid for my entire first year with scholarships and other merit-based aid. Then, I began living off a credit card. 
Horace Mann, the founder of my alma mater, called education “the great equalizer”. In some ways, it’s true. For the poor and working-class student who finds themselves let into a wealthy institution, every part of being there can be an education that helps level the field. At the same time, I felt markedly different than my peers in ways I couldn’t articulate. Before I came to Antioch – where it seemed like half the campus was either vegetarian or vegan – I’d never met anyone who offered political reasons to refuse food.
By the end of my first year, I knew better than to think that people got ahead just by following the rules. My elite peers had something I didn’t, something I might never have, something that was no result of hard work. In high school I’d worked minimum wage jobs just so I could afford to dress like everyone else, scouring discount stores for deals on the latest fashions. At Antioch, people wore “thrift store finds” and lived in intentional squalor, swearing off hygienic and other consumer products that I didn’t have the money to buy.
I was bitter, envious. I felt entitled to what they had – no more, but no less. I was tired of working two or three jobs at a time while going to school and still not having enough. When my second year of college came and the scholarships stopped, I started working as a stripper. As a sex worker I was rolling in cash, but still lacking in financial literacy. 
Poor people make choices that wealthier people wouldn’t. We are in debt for reasons those who aren’t can’t comprehend. Rather than explain myself, I gravitate toward those with similar experiences. 
After college, I lost my job as a public school teacher when it was revealed that I had worked in the sex industry. The fact that I was a competent teacher made no difference to my critics. It took years to re-establish myself in a new career as a writer. In the meantime, I hemorrhaged debt.
Now, five or so years later, I’ve paid off most my credit cards, but I don’t expect I’ll ever pay off my student loans. With three degrees, and after years of deferment, the amount due hovers somewhere around $80,000. Some people don’t get why. They ask: why did you go to a college you couldn’t afford? Why did you pursue a second and then a third degree if you couldn’t pay off the first one? Why did you pursue degrees in fields that will never pay off? I used to feel ashamed. Then I learned to tell my story, and surrounded myself with people who understood.
People in debt are some of the brightest, most resilient people there are. Today I have no regrets. Coming from little made me the woman I am. 
New car sales in the UK continued to rise last month as growing demand from businesses made up for falling demand from private buyers.
A total of 184,101 vehicles were registered in November, a rise of 2.9% from a year earlier, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. So far this year, more than 2.5m new cars were registered – a record for the 11-month period.
A 5.1% increase in fleet car registrations fuelled growth as sales to private buyers fell 1.2%, repeating a trend that took hold eight months ago. Demand for hybrid and electric cars rose 25% to 6,663 giving them a record 3.6% of the market.
Car sales have been powered by the growing economy and an abundance of cheap finance deals. However, economists have warned that falling sales to private purchasers show consumers are less willing to make big purchases amid economic uncertainty.
Mike Hawes, SMMT’s chief executive, said buyers were attracted by cars that are safer, more efficient and enjoyable to drive. Hawes said: “The latest advanced technology and cutting-edge designs are continuing to attract buyers into showrooms. It’s encouraging to see that alternatively fuelled vehicles, although still a small proportion of the market, have seen strong growth.”
Many companies are likely to have made decisions about buying fleet cars before the vote for Brexit, which means it could take time before the impact of the referendum can be assessed. Consumer confidence weakened markedly last month as households put off plans to buy big items amid rising inflation and concerns about the economy once Brexit is triggered next year.
Howard Archer, chief European and UK economist at IHS Markit, said: “The car sector will obviously be hoping that business confidence and activity prove resilient in 2017 despite likely mounting uncertainties over Brexit. It looks inevitable that the fundamentals for consumers will progressively and markedly weaken over the coming months.”
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I live in a city and am looking to move closer to family in a more rural part of the country, although with access to larger towns and cities. I have worked in human resources for about 10 years, mainly in the private sector, and while I enjoy the job I am looking for a change of direction when I move home, potentially with the ability to work more flexibly, or for myself.
I am a HR generalist but particularly enjoy the areas where I can interact with people and help them with their careers. I enjoy recruitment and selection, and often help friends and families, giving advice on their CVs and applying for jobs. I enjoy training people and engagement activities. I am less keen on the more “traditional” aspects of the job, such as discipline and grievance and policy. However, I do enjoy the application of these processes where it comes to providing advice and support to managers and individuals.
I understand people well and enjoy helping them to understand situations and the motivations of others.
I am now unsure of where I can best utilise my skills and am also very aware of the perception of HR people when it comes to applying for roles in different areas. I’m not sure people outside the profession would always recognise the key skills I would bring.
I have managed people in the past, and have considered whether using my skills to manage a team in a different area would be a solution, but I’m not sure what role I would have the experience for. I have also considered roles such as careers advice but am reluctant to make a move to the public sector. What would you and your readers advise?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
We reserved a new-build, off-plan, home at a local Redrow development at West Malling in Kent earlier this year, after accepting an offer on our house.
Unfortunately, a couple of weeks ago, our buyer pulled out at the 11th hour. Redrow decided immediately to put our reserved house back on the market.
During the construction, Redrow offered us a variety of upgrades such as nicer kitchen units, fancier sanitary ware etc, to which we agreed. These decisions had to be made by certain stages in the build or you lose the option. On this basis, we paid around £4,000 for our upgrades, but since the sale fell through, Redrow has told us we won’t receive any of this back.
Further to this, they are marketing the house at an increased price compared with the other identical homes in the development, to take into account the upgrades that have been installed.We have obviously lost the £500 reservation fee, but where do we stand in terms of the £4,000 we have invested in the house, whether they sell it or not?
Given how often house purchases fall through, it’s a brave person that invests £4,000 in a home that they don’t own.
Initially, Redrow stuck to the line that all your payments were non-refundable. “Once products are ordered and paid for, cancellations and refunds are unable to be accepted and this is made very clear through the terms and conditions which buyers are required to agree to before being able to make any MyRedrow (upgrade) purchase,” it said.
However, just as we asked for a copy of the terms and conditions with a view to getting a lawyer to look at them, it emerged that the local sales manager had decided that you would, in fact, be getting your £4,000 back, and this has now happened. It may be coincidental timing, or not.
Other Redrow home purchasers may want to reflect on this experience. We would advise buyers to wait until they exchange contracts before paying for any upgrades, otherwise you leave yourself open to losing any payments made.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Following a few glasses of wine, John’s inhibitions had dropped when he went online to talk to a woman he had met through an internet dating site. Although they hadn’t met in person, they had been exchanging messages for about a week and a half.
Because of the familiarity built up through previous messages, and the effects of the alcohol, when she suggested that she would remove some of her clothes if he did the same, he agreed. Straight away he realised he had been scammed.
“They said ‘Now I’ve recorded you. If you don’t pay me I’ll put the video all over Facebook and YouTube.’ My instant thought was that I had no choice and that I’d pay anything, because I thought that if they posted the video it would ruin my business and family relationships,” says the 60-year-old.
John is one of almost 900 people who have reported to the police that they’ve been the victim of “sextortion” cybercrime rackets – a growing trend among criminals to dupe men into performing sex acts on camera and then demanding money, threatening that the footage will be put online if they don’t pay up.
Victims are typically targeted on social media where criminals, posing as young women, engage them in conversation before eventually coaxing them into sexual chat aimed at making them expose themselves. The number of crimes reported has doubled since last year, throwing light on how social media users frequently apply much more lax security rules in their online life than they would offline or even when using things such as email. Not limited to “sexploitation” scams, criminals can also target people for bank passwords and in property transactions.
“When we are publishing on social media, we don’t see that as being public because we are at home working at a laptop. It does not feel like it is outside so the indicators we are getting are that we are in a safe space,” says Prof Tim Watson, director of the Cybersecurity Centre at the University of Warwick.
Many people would consider themselves able to spot a “phishing” attempt, whereby emails are sent which appear genuine but instead contain links aimed at gathering information such as bank details. There is less awareness around “spear phishing”, where specific people or groups of people are targeted by fraudsters, sometimes with information gleaned from social media, such as what football team or music they like.
Research in Germany showed this was a particular problem on social media. Zinaida Benenson from the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg measured how many people would click on a potentially malicious link in an email, then compared this with how many did the same with a message received on Facebook. The results were that one in five clicked a link from a stranger in an email; more than twice as many did so on Facebook. “It especially goes for sharing pictures, because this is something that is done a lot via Facebook. That is what some of the participants told us,” says Benenson.
Before sending a friend request or a message inviting users to link to them, the criminals build up information about people which is publicly available, Watson says. “They know what football team you support, they know what sort of food you like. They can see your pattern of life from what you have publicly made available. What that does is show them very cheaply and quickly on that scale who the likely, most productive victims are going to be,” he says. “It won’t be a random email. It will be mentioning people you know. It will be mentioning things you are interested in. It will be capturing you late at night when you are tired. It is building on the confidence indicators you have given away.”
The National Crime Agency (NCA), which revealed the extent of sexploitation, hopes the publicity around the cases will reveal other victims – which could number in the thousands. Over the past 12 months, four men have killed themselves after being convinced to perform sex acts and then blackmailed. Last year, 17-year-old Ronan Hughes from County Tyrone, Northern Ireland, is believed to have taken his own life after he was tricked into posting intimate photos. In Romania in October a man was subsequently charged with producing and distributing indecent images of children and blackmail.
“Previously people have been hesitant to come forward because of that embarrassment factor, this idea that it could affect them personally or career-wise. So they don’t come forward and they pay,” says Roy Sinclair, from the NCA’s anti-kidnap and extortion unit.
This new type of sophisticated online scam, whether through dating sites or set up to extract bank information, can affect anyone, Watson says. In the same way a scam may happen on someone’s doorstep, confidence tricks have now been transferred online.
“People should not feel embarrassed for falling for these. Everybody falls for them. Computer security professionals will fall for them. And it is not fair to turn around to someone who has become a victim and say ‘Why did you click on that link? Don’t click on a friend request from strangers’. These people are not strangers because they may have already become friends with some of your friends. How do you protect yourself against this? It is quite difficult, you just have to have that sceptical voice inside your head and there are other ways of contacting people,” Watson says.
In an era when people are constantly bombarded with correspondence, awareness can be difficult, Benenson says. “In real life, being vigilant is extremely difficult and people make mistakes even if they try,” she said.
The solutions to avoiding this next generation of online scams appear simple, yet clearly are often not observed.
“If someone presents you with a friend request and five minutes later gets very intimate with you , if someone is remarkably out of your league… just have that sceptical voice in your head saying ‘Is this the truth or am I being scammed here?,” Watson says. “These are people who have a great ability to pick on victims through the internet, picking on them using very strong human emotions.”
Mark James, a security specialist with IT security firm ESET, says you should research people before you deal with them online. “If it’s via social media check their background or history, see how long they’ve been active and try searching other services – chances are they will be active on different platforms if they are legitimate,” he says. “Be very wary of requests for photos or videos and always remember, once you post something you have no control on what others do with it – regardless of if you think it’s secure and safe, it’s never 100% private.
“The best approach is never do it, no matter how safe you feel. Always take a few minutes and think about the worst-case scenario if something goes wrong, and remember if it looks too good to be true, it often is.”
■ If you are approached with an online friend request, pause and ask yourself the question of how you know them. “It involves looking at it and saying, ‘Do I remember meeting this person? Are they friends with anyone else I know? Why have they suddenly chosen to ask me for a friend request?’,” says Roy Sinclair from the National Crime Agency.
■ Even if you do end up talking to someone you met online who you think is authentic, beware that all may not be as it seems. Fraudsters can use pre-programmed footage so it appears that someone is responding to you on video.
■ In the event that a scam happens, don’t pay money online. Claims that it will be a one-off payment are no guarantee. Contact the police and don’t delete your account, so that any evidence can be preserved for investigation.
Thousands of owners of potentially dangerous tumble dryers are being forced to wait for modifications to their machines, a year after the manufacturer announced a safety alert due to the risk of them bursting into flames, a consumer group has warned.
Which? said Whirlpool customers were being subjected to “slow, poor service” and even incorrect and dangerous advice, as it published the results of a survey showing that one in five are still saddled with a faulty machine.
Whirlpool is in the process of replacing or repairing an estimated 5.3m potentially faulty machines across the UK – under well-known brand names Indesit, Hotpoint, Creda and Proline – after identifying a safety defect last November caused when excess fluff touches the heating element. However, it did not issue a product recall, telling customers that they could continue to use their tumble dryer while waiting for the modification, provided it was not left unattended.
In a new survey, Which? found that 22% of affected customers it first polled in an earlier exercise in April were still waiting for their machine to be repaired or replaced. A quarter of affected customers (26%) had been told by Whirlpool they would have to wait longer than six months for their tumble dryer to be repaired, and one in five (22%) were told that the wait would be between three and six months. 
Fire chiefs warned in October that owners of the faulty dryers must stop using them immediately, after one of the machines was found to be the cause of a huge blaze in an 18-storey tower block in Shepherd’s Bush in London. Following a six-week investigation, fire chiefs confirmed that the dryer was behind the August blaze, which ripped through part of the building in west London and took 120 firefighters to control. They urged Whirlpool to change its advice to customers so that any dryers waiting to be modified are not used – advice rejected by the company. They also warned of the lack of a robust national system of product recalls in emergency situations.
Piling further pressure on Whirlpool, Which? also claimed it was giving potentially dangerous advice to mystery shoppers only last month, telling one that their machine was not affected despite the model number being listed in the safety notice, and incorrectly advising three others to contact the shop they bought the machine from for a replacement. 
“It is absolutely unacceptable that one year on, Whirlpool customers are still seeing slow, poor service and potentially receiving incorrect and dangerous advice,” said Alex Neill, managing director of home and legal services at Which?. “Its modification programme is clearly not progressing as fast as it should. Following the devastating fire caused by a tumble dryer in Shepherd’s Bush earlier this year, Whirlpool cannot be allowed to continue letting consumers down. It must clean up its act and sort out this mess urgently.” 
Shadow minister for housing and London, Andy Slaughter – MP for Hammersmith and in whose constituency the fire broke out – said: “The new research produced by Which? provides further evidence that Whirlpool’s response to this issue has been totally inadequate thus far, and makes it clear that they have disregarded the safety and consumer rights of those in possession of these faulty dryers. Whirlpool need to rectify this immediately, and should do so by implementing a full product recall and changing their safety advice to consumers.”
Whirlpool said in a statement: “We urge everyone who owns an Indesit, Hotpoint or Creda dryer manufactured between April 2004 and September 2015 to check if their dryer is affected and then register for a free modification if it is. The safety of consumers is our number one priority and we are committed to doing everything we can to ensure that the tumble dryer modification programme is carried out in a safe and timely manner.”
The company insisted it was continuing to make improvements to speed up the modification programme – hiring 300 additional engineers to deal with the backlog.
Workplace lawyer Josh Bornstein was so emotionally affected by a bullying case handled by his firm that he lobbied the prime minister to fast-track the complaints process so victims could quickly put an end to their torment.
The case that spurred him to action involved a 42-year-old female road worker who was so widely bullied by so many people over two years she developed depression and post-traumatic stress disorder and is unlikely to be able to work again.
In January the supreme court of Victoria awarded her $1.36m in compensation after she endured rape threats and sexual harassment.
“This was very graphic to read and distressing. Her health is irretrievably damaged,” says Bornstein, a principal at Maurice Blackburn in Melbourne.
By lobbying the then prime minister, Julia Gillard, Bornstein managed to get a change in the law under the Fair Work Act, which allows bullying victims to fast-track their matters and have an order made to stop the behaviour.
“That was … wonderful. I don’t usually get to do anything like that,” says Bornstein of his victory two years ago.
“Because the new laws [came about] in 2013, employers have been required to improve their compliance and improve their internal processes to deal with bullying complaints.”
The complaints process may be improving, but bullying is not getting any better.
In fact, there has been a significant rise in incidents over the past five years, according to the Australian Workplace Barometer project, which has produced the first national collection of information on bullying and harassment in Australian workplaces.
Nearly one in 10 workers (9.7%) say they have been bullied in the past six months, up from 7% in 2010. The most frequent perpetrators are supervisors who are most likely to yell at people and humiliate them.
Bullying is estimated to cost up to $36bn annually in Australia through its impacts on victims and bystanders, say the workplace barometer report’s authors, academics from the University of South Australia.
Rhonda Brighton-Hall, an Australian expert in human resources, has an interesting theory about what is behind the rise in workplace bullying.
She sees it as a backlash to managers’ loss of control in the modern workplace, twinned with a ramping up of pressure.
“The workforce is so mobile. People are working from home, they are moving around. They [managers] don’t have the control they used to have,” says Brighton-Hall, who is on the board of the Australian Human Resources Institute and has held executive HR roles at the Commonwealth Bank and Luxottica.
“They used to sit at their desk, the team sat in front of them and they had control. Now they don’t. So they try to put processes in place to try and control everybody, they put in more and more rules and expectations so that nobody really knows what they are.”
Brighton-Hall says that treatment makes workers feel unworthy. “That type of bullying is insidious and it is very damaging on the individual,” she says.
Added to that is work intensification, which is cramming more tasks and responsibilities into people’s working hours.
“Putting them into a pressure cooker means that people are acting out … more than they used to,” she says.
While Bornstein says fast-tracking means he is seeing fewer bullying cases. Brighton-Hall, who at HR level is further down the line of complaint, is seeing no improvement in behaviour.
“There’s certainly an increase in incidents – I am seeing so many more cases and there is also more reporting on it because there has been an increase in understanding what bullying is,” Brighton-Hall says.
The barometer report, which surveyed 4,200 people, puts forward three reasons for the bullying: a lack of managerial regard for workplace psychological health and safety; bullying and harassment used to get more productivity from workers; and personal power plays.
Bullying tends to occur in workplaces where there is not enough commitment from senior managers to contain stress levels and prioritise psychological health.
Poor task and job design leads to people being overwhelmed by demands while struggling with low levels of resources. This creates an environment ripe for bullying.
“Many managers or supervisors feel pressured to compete for job permanency, and strained to complete tasks or meet targets or objectives,” according to the report, released in November.
“As a result they may employ bullying tactics, under these stressful conditions and pressures, perhaps through poor performance management processes, to drive greater performance.”
As one overwhelmed complainant said to Brighton-Hall: “My boss sent me four texts on Saturday and five on Sunday and I was away for the weekend, so I didn’t respond until Sunday night when I got home. And, by Monday morning, I had a warning letter.”
This wasn’t just one weekend either, says Brighton-Hall. “There is this constant upping of the pressure to make the person feel they are not doing a good job.”
The barometer report recommends organisations improve psychological safety by reducing work conditions such as high demand, high pressure, high competition and low control/power situations.
A year since Whirlpool issued safety alert, Which? says customers subjected to slow and inadequate service
Britain’s rapidly growing army of agency workers is as serious an issue as zero-hours contracts, with full-time agency staff earning hundreds of pounds a year less than employees doing the same jobs, according to a new report into the issue.
The Resolution Foundation thinktank warns that agency staff are the new ‘secret agents’ in the UK labour market, as it begins an 18-month investigation into the whole area of agency work.
Its report deplores that the “exploitation of agency staff remains unaddressed,” while the treatment of staff on zero-hours contracts at places like the Sports Direct warehouse in Shirebrook has made headlines and prompted changes.
Lindsay Judge, senior policy analyst at the Resolution Foundation, said: “While zero-hours contracts are often in the news, agency workers are the ‘forgotten face’ of the modern workforce, despite being just as prevalent across the labour market. This fast growing group is not just made up of young people looking for temporary employment as some have suggested, but instead includes many older full-time, permanent workers.”
Agency work is booming, but it means an average pay penalty of 22p an hour, equivalent to £430 a year for those working full-time, according to the report, entitled Secret Agents: agency workers in the new world of work. The loss of earnings rises to 45p an hour for permanent agency workers.
Agency workers also lack basic employment rights: they are not entitled to sick pay or parental leave pay, have no notice period and little recourse in the event of dismissal.
Despite the stereotype of agency workers being short term and temporary, half of all agency workers say they work on a permanent basis and three-quarters work full time.
The number of office temps, bank nurses, fruit pickers, IT consultants and other agency staff has grown by 30%, or 200,000 people, to 865,000 since 2011 and is set to swell to a million by the end of the decade, according to the independent thinktank’s analysis of Labour Force survey data.
The foundation acknowledges that there are good reasons for some employers and workers to use agencies – namely flexibility, variety and absence of bureaucracy – but warns that many do it out of necessity rather than choice. More than 60% of temporary agency workers would prefer to be in a permanent role.
TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady believes many agency workers are getting an unfair deal.
“Agency workers don’t deserve to be treated like second-class citizens. But they are often paid less than their permanent colleagues, even when they do exactly the same job,” says O’Grady.
“We need the government to toughen the law to create a level playing field for agency workers. Too many employers are getting away with treating them unfairly.”
Agency work is most prevalent in the healthcare and social sector, where 18% of all agency staff work, closely followed by manufacturing (17%) and business activities (17%). The latter includes conference organisers, credit rating agents, business consultants and literary agents. Nearly one in five agency workers are in London, but the East Midlands has the largest share of the local labour force working in this way (3.2%).
While 54% of all agency workers are male – the same gender split as for overall employment – women account for 85% of the growth in the number of temporary agency staff in the last five years.
In October, the parliamentary business, energy and industrial strategy committee launched an inquiry into the rapidly changing nature of work, agency workers, the self-employed, and those working in the ”gig economy”. It comes after its inquiry into working practices at Sports Direct, news stories about the use of agency staff at Asos, concerns about couriers at Hermes and growing questions about the status of those working in the ‘on-demand’ economy for businesses such as Uber and Deliveroo.
Judge said: “It is important that the discussion of the non-traditional parts of work in modern Britain consider the relatively lower pay that agency workers receive compared to identical employees in similar jobs. This merits serious examination from government, with an official measure of agency workers being a good place to start.”
Agency workers defy stereotypes: many work in high-end industries such as IT consultants, and the majority are not low-skilled migrants, stay-at-home mums or students as is often thought.
However, the research also found that agency workers are disproportionately drawn from ethnic and other minorities and are more concentrated in low-paid industries and lower-skilled jobs.
The TUC highlighted the growing use of the loophole known as the Swedish derogation. This loophole allows agency workers placed with companies to be paid less than direct employees, provided the agency agrees to continue paying them for at least four weeks at times when it is unable to find them work.
Agency workers are more likely to be younger and less qualified than the rest of the workforce, and four out of five are white. However, 8% of all black and African Caribbean workers in the UK are agency staff, even though they only make up 2.7% of the overall workforce.
Six in 10 agency workers are UK nationals, compared to more than eight in 10 in the overall workforce. EU nationals account for 22% of agency workers while people from the rest of the world make up 17%. Ethnic minorities are three times more likely to be agency workers than white workers.
Dictators and human rights abusers who buy luxury property in London and use the UK to conceal their wealth could have their assets seized under an MPs’ initiative.
A group of backbenchers are seeking to amend the government’s criminal finances bill and introduce a clause targeting those guilty of human rights abuses outside Britain. It would allow officials and organisations such as Amnesty International to apply for an order to freeze their UK assets.
The amendment is named after the Russian lawyer Sergei Magnitsky, who died in prison in Moscow in 2009 after exposing an alleged $230m (£181m) fraud carried out by leading Kremlin officials.
The initiative enjoys unusually wide cross-party support. Labour’s Chris Bryant said the chances of it becoming law were “quite positive”.
The bill, which could come into force as early as spring 2017, is designed to clean up London’s reputation as a haven for “dirty money”. Its existing provisions target corrupt politicians and international criminals who launder money through the capital’s banks and plough stolen cash into high-end real estate.
The National Crime Agency estimates that up to £100bn of dubious money passes through the UK a year. The Magnitsky amendment, which will be tabled on Monday, could result in high court judges passing two-year freezing orders on human rights abusers. There will be a right to appeal.
The Conservative MP Dominic Raab, who tabled the amendment, said: “People with blood on their hands for the worst human rights abuses should not be able to funnel their dirty money into the UK. This change in the law will protect Britain from becoming a safe place for despots and dictators to hide their money.”
The former Labour MP Denis MacShane said going after the London assets of state functionaries was “an updated version of getting Al Capone on tax evasion charges because it was not possible to bring him to justice for murder”.
“It will sow panic in the ranks of Putin apparatchiks who want to own flats and hide money in London, and send children to private schools in the UK,” he said.
Supporters of the proposal include the Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas, the SNP and the Ukip MP Douglas Carswell. The Labour MP and former public accounts committee chair Margaret Hodge said Britain had been “a safe haven for foreign kleptocrats and their ill-gotten gains” for too long, adding: “We hope this legislation will end this.”
The Home Office says the bill, introduced in October, will significantly improve the government’s ability to tackle money laundering and corruption, recover the proceeds of crime and impact upon terrorist financing. It follows an anti-corruption summit hosted by the then prime minister David Cameron in May and revelations in the Panama Papers that foreign autocrats and their families used offshore structures to buy London property.
Under the Magnitsky amendment, the names of individuals who have been involved in, or profited from, human rights abuse would be published. Ministers would be obliged to apply for an order if they are presented with compelling evidence of abuse and it is in the public interest to do so.
The amendment is the latest in a series of legislative initiatives around the world to end the impunity of those involved in the Magnitsky case and other human rights abuses. In 2012, the US Congress passed a Magnitsky act, which sanctioned the Russian officials involved and provoked a furious backlash from the Russian president, Vladimir Putin.
Britain’s information commissioner has reopened the file on construction industry blacklisting amid fears that the malpractice is still taking place.
Elizabeth Denham, who is charged with protecting data privacy, told the Guardian she has already “reviewed” her office’s papers on blacklisting since taking up the post in July.
The 57-year-old Canadian is so concerned by the scandal, which was seemingly settled in court this year, that she told staff to begin “a watching brief” on the construction industry to make sure the practice has ended.
Denham, who was previously the information and privacy commissioner for British Columbia in Canada, said: “I read about that case, I’ve looked into that case, and it was deeply concerning.
“That practice was deeply concerning to me, and we do have some follow-up plans and that’s all I can say right now: we are following up. I think the practice is something we have to be alert to checking, to make sure that it has ceased.
“It means keeping tabs, it means a watching file, a watching brief … It’s fair to say that I’ve reviewed that file.”
The blacklisting scandal hit the headlines when the Information Commissioner’s Office (ICO) raided a Worcestershire-based company called the Consulting Association in 2009.
The organisation kept a list of more than 3,000 workers, including details – often incorrect – of their political views and trade union activities that were used to vet them when applying for jobs. There were also notes on personal relationships and suggestions that workers were incompetent.
Some of the biggest names in the construction sector, including Balfour Beatty, Carillion, Costain, Laing O’Rourke and Sir Robert McAlpine, settled with the GMB, Ucatt and Unite unions this year on allegations of using the list. The companies denied blacklisting, arguing that automatic discrimination did not occur when the lists were used.
Nevertheless, the practice was rumoured for years. It is alleged to have gone on for more than four decades and the Consulting Association’s data stretched back to the early 1990s. Workers were checked against the list for jobs on publicly funded projects such as the London 2012 Olympic Park and the Millennium Dome.
Unite’s settlement saw 256 workers share more than £10m in compensation this year. GMB and Ucatt, which is the main construction workers’ union with 80,000 members in the UK and Ireland, received about £75m for 771 claimants in April.
However, it has long been feared that the practice is deeper rooted than the initial investigation found and that blacklisting continues.
The ICO is best known for making sure that companies and the government adhere to the 1998 Data Protection Act, and for monitoring the correct use of the 2000 Freedom of Information Act. It also tackles the misuse of personal data, meaning that blacklisting is within the ICO’s remit.
The GMB national secretary, Justin Bowden, said: “The GMB would welcome further investigation into the nefarious activities of systematic blacklisting of 3,500 trade unionists and environmental activists by the household names of the construction industry.
“We have always called for greater rigour by the ICO alongside a public inquiry, and for blacklisting to become a criminal offence punishable by prison and unlimited fines.”
Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, said: “Blacklisting in construction was an appalling scandal and the victims have never had full justice. That’s why we called for a full inquiry that could also consider whether the law itself needs to be changed.
“Ministers can’t just leave this to the information commissioner and it’s well past time they stepped in and took proper action, to ensure all those involved are accountable and this never happens again.”
In July I paid an American cheque for $24,000 into my Barclays current account, and four months on it has not cleared. I have repeatedly asked Barclays what is going on – at around £19,300 this is a huge amount of money – and have been getting endless excuses and conflicting information.
After refusing to leave the branch one day I was taken into the bank manager’s office and told by a manager that Barclays had “fallen out” with a holding bank and there was a delay on the cashing of US cheques dating back to March.
The latest information I have is that this holding bank has severed all communication with Barclays and there is a chance “I will never get this money”, as one Barclays representative told me. Barclays International team has been trying to contact the holding bank for three months, I am told.
I don’t understand how this can happen. I believe Barclays has a duty of care to be honest and transparent, and also to be able to cover funds if there is an internal problem. I am having to use my savings to keep my business afloat. How many other people are in this position?
Most readers would be similarly incredulous to be told by a branch manager that there was no immediate prospect of getting such a large sum credited to their account. Barclays HQ told us that what you had been told (more than once by bank staff) was not correct and that it has not experienced issues with US banks, or the supplier “holding” bank. It says that this was an isolated case that has only affected you.
Crucially, it has acted quickly to pay the lost money into your account. It has also offered an extra £517 to say sorry and to cover lost interest. It adds: “This was a genuine error where there was a delay in releasing funds, and falls short of the brilliant experience we want all our customers to have. We have apologised… and transferred the full amount to the customer and offered a gesture of goodwill to cover any inconvenience and confusion caused.”
The only question that remains is what caused the problem? We wonder whether money-laundering rules may have something to do with it. The bank can’t tell customers when they are investigating possible laundering as it is deemed to be tipping off.
Meanwhile, you might want to ask clients to pay you by bank transfer. It’s incredibly risky sending cheques for such large sums in the post. Much better to get the money sent electronically – with a small test payment at the start.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Our careers expert – and you the readers – advise a school librarian who wants to visit their prospective employer and someone whose job will end after Brexit
A vegetarian restaurant owner’s decision not to accept the new £5 note because it contains traces of meat byproducts has come under fire from vegetarians and omnivores alike.
Sharon Meijland, who has run the Rainbow cafe in Cambridge for three decades, said she would not allow customers to pay with the polymer note because the animal byproduct tallow is used during the production process.
The businesswoman said she had been shocked and frightened by some of the online reaction to her decision, but that customers had supported her stance.
“Our own customers who are actually in the restaurant in Cambridge have been very favourable, but it is people on Facebook – there’s been a good deal of charming comments such as ‘I hope this comes back to bite you in the ass’,” she said.
On Twitter, Stephen Coltrane said he had eaten at the Rainbow cafe and enjoyed it, but that Meijland’s stance was an “over-reaction”.
Robbie Weir tweeted: “Pretty hypocritical when the food on your menu … contains animal products.”
Denise Venn tweeted: “I’m veggie and I find this so embarrassing. We’re not all this stupid.”
Others accused Meijland, 66, of seeking publicity, but she rejected the claim and said some people were reacting in such a way “because I made a stand”.
Meanwhile, former Smiths frontman Morrissey has hit out at the animal fat contained in the fiver.
The Meat is Murder singer said on his True To You fan site: “If it had been revealed by the Bank of England that the new British five pound note contained slices of cat or dog, the country would be in an uproar.
“But because we have been trained to accept the vicious slaughter of cows, sheep and pigs, the UK media can only make light of the use of tallow in the new British fiver because animal slaughter is thought to be outside of the human grasp and concern.”
He suggested anyone who did not take issue with the revelation that traces of tallow are used in the production process should donate their own bodies for “decorative use in future £5 notes”.
More than 125,000 people have signed a petition calling on the Bank of England to remove tallow from the new notes.
After signing it, Meijland said she spoke with staff and they decided they could not justify handling the notes.
“We all said we all felt very uneasy about handling it. We thought the only way round this is to just not accept them.”
Vowing to stick with the decision, she added: “I am shocked and frightened at my age to get such hatred [online].”
She said the cafe had been runnerup in the best ethical restaurant category in the Observer Food Monthly awards for the last five years.
Polymer bank notes, which last far longer than their paper equivalents, were developed in Australia.
Prof David Solomon, who led a CSIRO team that created the notes, said this week that the tallow controversy was “absolutely stupid”, adding: “There’s trivial amounts of it in there.”
As well as being robust and difficult to forge, Solomon said polymer notes were also more hygienic.
The Bank of England said this week that Innovia, which makes the polymer fiver, was considering “potential solutions” to the problem.
“Innovia is now working intensively with its supply chain and will keep the Bank informed on progress towards potential solutions,” it said.
The £5 note – the first to be printed on polymer by the Bank of England – was introduced in September and is likely to signal the beginning of the end for paper money.
Number 10 Downing Street took delivery of its Christmas tree yesterday, just a few days after Michelle Obama unveiled her last-ever festive decorations for the White House. Meanwhile, radio and TV adverts implore us to pop down to our local garden centre this weekend as the eight million firs and spruces that Brits will buy this season are lined up for the first major rush. But is buying a tree on 3 December too early – and also a tad vulgar?
If you think they appear to have arrived early this year, you’re right. Normally the second and third weekends of December are the major selling points. But as Christmas falls on a weekend, major retailers reckon that families will be buying this weekend, or on the weekend of the 10th, rather than waiting until the 17th.
Bah humbug? Lots of people may think so. “Flogging Christmas trees in November, or the first few days of December, is just another example of tinsel-coated crass consumerism,” says Simon Birch, a writer for Ethical Consumer magazine. “The truth is that corporate-fuelled pressure on shoppers to buy, buy, buy is both driving people into debt and putting the environment under unsustainable pressure.”
Others will say 3 December is too early because the needles will start dropping well before Christmas Day.
Retailers – and maybe it’s not surprising that they would say this – are spinning a different line: according to Wyevale Garden Centres’ tree buyer, David Mitchell, who has sourced more than 100,000 trees for the chain this year, buying in the first week of December is actually better than leaving it until later.
“All the trees are cut in the fields at roughly the same time, in the last two weeks of November.” His argument is that the sooner you buy your tree and put it into some water at home, the better. Otherwise they are just sat in stores drying out. By his logic, trees bought in early December are less likely to shed their needles by Christmas Day than ones bought later.
So what should you be buying, where, and at what price?
The British Christmas Tree Growers Association (BCTGA) says prices should be roughly the same as last year. Wyevale has held its prices for the third year, with the average 5ft-6ft tree costing around £35. But on Sunday 4 December, Aldi launches its 5ft-6ft Nordmann fir for £19.99, while Ikea is again selling its trees for £25, but you also get a £20 voucher redeemable in-store if you return between 16 January and 12 February, making the tree effectively just £5.
Taller trees, meanwhile, go for tall prices: upmarket Clifton Nursery in Maida Vale, London, is selling a 10ft Nordmann fir for £235, while John Lewis is offering a free in-store “treetorial” for those aiming to make their tree a “showstopper”. For another £200 you can buy its “full festive works” tree decorating service. Someone evidently forgot the memo about austerity Britain.
Oslo famously donates the big tree in Trafalgar Square as a grateful thank you for British support to Norway during the second world war. But according to the BCTGA, around 75% of Christmas trees are now home grown. Cheap imports from Scandinavian countries (Denmark is actually a much bigger supplier than Norway) have been hit by the falling pound, it says.
Wyevale’s Mitchell says it gets the majority of its trees from Ireland, but claims to have seen Brexit coming, so did some hedging. We don’t think he was joking. Others, however, say that massive planting of trees six to eight years ago in Denmark means it will be flooding the UK this year with cheap trees, irrespective of sterling’s decline.
Last autumn was wet and mild. This year has been ideal, say growers, with early frosts in Scotland helping to send trees into semi-hibernation. This is a good thing, experts say, as it means the trees last longer after being cut down. Frosts bring out a waxy resin on the needles that helps keep the moisture in.
Most buyers want something between 5ft and 6ft high. A four-foot-sixer can be passed off as 6ft if it has grown a long spindle, but that’s unfair on buyers, says Mitchell, who talks darkly of rival chains’ behaviour. It’s a viciously competitive market out there.
Nordmanns have conquered the market with their non-drop needles. They make up 80% of trees bought by British households, says Harry Brightwell of the BCTGA. Norway spruces, once the most popular, account for just 15% of sales.
The “new-style Swedes” are Nordmann firs that have been specially cultivated to have thinned-out branches and a lighter frame, making them easier to carry home and with more space for gifts. Other varieties such as the Fraser fir are a little pricier, but growers claim they have better “needle retention”. The Korean fir is also catching on, noted for its two-tone green and silver needles and “refreshing aroma”.
The fragrance of a real tree is why many people say they prefer them, but keep an eye out for that hardy annual tabloid headline, “Could YOU be allergic to your Christmas tree?”. Moulds that grow on trees can, it seems, trigger asthma attacks, sneezing and a runny nose, say researchers, some of whom are not even sponsored by manufacturers of hay fever remedies. It even has a name: Christmas Tree Syndrome.
Experts say that cutting half an inch off the base of your tree is a good trick to keep it looking healthy for longer. Brightwell at the BCTGA says you should ideally leave it outdoors in a large bucket filled with water for a day or two before bringing it inside. Once inside, keep it watered and place it away from radiators and open fires, which somewhat destroys the Christmas card look many try to achieve.
Most councils now offer free collection in early January so that trees are recycled. But are real Christmas trees simply a decadent waste of resources that are bad for the environment?
The Guardian wrestled with this question in 2008 pointing out that most trees are intensively farmed on an industrial scale and are typically sprayed with potent fertilisers and herbicides. As such they are hardly a haven for biodiversity.
But we also pointed out that artificial trees aren’t necessarily an eco-alternative, and are usually plastic tat produced thousands of miles away and shipped around the planet for our seasonal gratification. They will, of course, last longer, but when thrown out are not biodegradable.
Our advice was to find a tree that has been farmed sustainably – look at the Soil Association and Forest Stewardship Council sites for guidance. And try to find a tree grown close to home rather than imported from overseas.
Last week I contacted Lakeland for advice as the drive shaft kept falling out. This meant that I had to add the ingredients while the bucket was in the machine. Lakeland customer services replied the next day with the offer of a replacement machine. This arrived three days later. We are all quick to complain (rightly) when we have bad experiences, but I believe in showing my appreciation to those who provide such excellent and prompt service.
When it comes to post-purchase service Lakeland is almost in a league of its own.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Labour has committed to banning new houses being sold as leasehold, in a boost for Guardian Money’s campaign against escalating ground rents that have made some homes virtually unsaleable.
The promise, by Labour’s shadow secretary of state for housing John Healey, comes just days after the government, in answer to a question in the House of Commons, pledged to “stamp out” the abuses highlighted by us.
In recent weeks we have revealed how many buyers of new-build homes, particularly in the north-west of England, have been sold their properties on a leasehold basis rather than the traditional freehold, only to find themselves locked into spiralling ground rent demands. In some cases the rents double every 10 years, leaving households with the prospect of bills eventually reaching more than £10,000 a year. When they come to sell, they then find that mortgage lenders will no longer offer loans against their home, making it virtually worthless.
Answering a question raised by the MP Peter Bottomley, communities secretary Sajid Javid told the Commons: “We must make sure the kind of abuses he mentioned are stamped out and we will continue to do everything [we can]. We do work with a number of stakeholders and we can certainly see how we can do more.”
But Labour is promising to go further. It says it will cap ground rent charges and set out a plan to end the routine use of leasehold ownership in new housing developments. In the longer term it says ground rents could be abolished altogether.
Healey said: “Homeowners who own their home on a leasehold basis are currently unprotected from huge rises in rip-off ground rents from developers or management companies. At its worst this is little more than legalised extortion, and too many leaseholders are having to pay hefty bills as a result. Under a Labour government this sharp practice would end.”
Ground rents are a medieval relic, sadly still going in England but abolished (like leasehold itself) in much of the former empire. The Irish in particular harboured a hatred of them, seeing them as a form of serfdom imposed by absentee British aristocrats. In 1978 the Republic banned the creation of any new ground rents, while in 2004 Scotland brought in the Abolition of Feudal Tenure Act. Only in this country do new ground rents persist. We are the last colony not to rebel against our feudal landowners.
But we should not limit reforms to leasehold houses alone. The government has promised a new era of housebuilding, and in the big cities the majority of new homes will be apartments, not houses. These are routinely sold as leasehold when they should be commonhold.
Under commonhold, the individual flat buyer owns everything. There is no landlord, freeholder or lease to worry about; ownership means ownership. There is still a need, of course, to repair and maintain the property, but the flat owners choose their own property management company, eliminating many of the rip-offs that are sadly all too common.
Thing is, England already has commonhold, as it was introduced in 2002 – by Labour. But it was not obligatory, and developers just ignored it as they could make easy money from continuing with leases. It really should not be that challenging to amend the 2002 act to make all new apartments commonhold. The thornier issue is how to terminate existing leaseholds. The freeholders will seek compensation for the loss of their future income stream, but caps need to be imposed to prevent exploitation.
Meanwhile, we will continue our investigation. Which are the companies and individuals raking in the most from escalating ground rents? We would be happy to hear readers’ experiences.
Chrisopher Seddon, the 60-year-old author featured in Guardian Money last week after being falsely accused of shoplifting, has been paid a substantial sum following an outcry by readers furious at his treatment at the hands of supermarket group Waitrose.
Last week we related how Seddon was accused of stealing £102-worth of meat by a security guard at Waitrose’s Chesham branch. He was grabbed by the police, handcuffed and accused of taking the meat 17 days earlier. The guard had downloaded a shot of the alleged thief from the store’s CCTV feed.
At the time of the arrest the security guard thrust the photo of the thief in Seddon’s face, and screamed: “Do you deny this is you?”
Seddon, who was at home in north London at the time of the alleged theft, spent £9,600 on legal fees and expert reports which showed he could not have been the thief. The case was dropped the day before it was due to be heard on the advice of the Crown Prosecution Service.
Despite what he called his “scandalous” treatment, Waitrose denied liability and refused to compensate him for his losses. Instead, it offered him a £500 “goodwill payment” because he was a “valued customer”.
More than 1,100 Guardian readers commented online, and many wrote directly to Waitrose chief executive Rob Collins, to say how appallingly they thought the incident had been dealt with.
John Fitton was one reader who contacted Collins directly. He wrote: “I simply wish to state that I felt that the way in which your security guard dealt with the situation is repugnant and the manner in which Waitrose subsequently dealt with Mr Seddon reflects a miserable attitude to one of your customers.
“Waitrose customer service is one of the reasons I shop in your stores.
“However, I will no longer use them until I see a story announcing an apology to Mr Seddon for his unfair treatment and a decent offer of compensation.”
This week the company agreed to a payment, thought to be his entire losses. A confidentiality agreement means the details are secret.
A Waitrose spokesman said: “This is a complex situation involving our third-party security provider, Thames Valley Police and Waitrose. Waitrose has discussed Mr Seddon’s concerns with him further. While we believe that Waitrose has no legal obligation in this matter, we are nevertheless very sorry to hear of the distress he has experienced. Therefore, as a gesture of goodwill and with no admission of any liability, we have reached a financial agreement which Mr Seddon has indicated he is happy with.”
Meanwhile Seddon is happy the matter is over.
“Without the Guardian this outcome would not have been possible. I hope that the publicity will serve as a wake-up call to retail businesses and security firms that they cannot allow this sort of thing to happen and then attempt to shirk their responsibilities,” he said.
Households tempted by the promise of low prices if they switch to an unknown gas and electricity supplier have been warned not to run up big credit balances, in the light of the collapse of GB Energy.
Last weekend the company, which had 160,000 customers, became the first domestic energy company to cease trading since 2008. With it blaming its failure on a big jump in wholesale prices, experts are predicting it won’t be the last supplier to leave customers in the lurch this winter.
Increasingly, price comparison websites’ lists of cheapest tariffs are almost exclusively topped by names few will have heard of. In the past two years there have been a host of new entrants offering prices substantially below those charged by the big names.
Joe Malinowski, who runs price comparison website TheEnergyShop.com, says the question is not if others will follow GB Energy, but how many?”
“When switching to a smaller supplier, do your research and make sure you understand the risks. Stay clear of those that take payments in advance. Check your credit balance regularly and ask for a refund if it gets too large.”
Mark Todd, who runs rival switching site Energyhelpline.com, says no consumer should be running a credit of more than 20% of their annual consumption – but that is particularly true if they are signed up to a small firm.
Domestic energy customers can often be hundreds of pounds in credit at this time of the year, as they plan for their bills to be much higher during the peak winter period. “The spike in wholesale costs has left any firm that was not ‘forward buying’ looking very vulnerable, particularly if we have a cold winter and wholesale prices continue to rise,” says Todd. “If you’ve run up a big balance, ask for some if it back – and lower your direct debits.”
But he adds that customers who moved to an unknown firm don’t need to panic as protections have been put in place by energy regulator Ofgem to come to their aid if a supplier goes bust.
Last month it announced it had implemented a safety net to guarantee customer balances, and within three days of GB’s failure it appointed Co-operative Energy as its chosen “supplier of last resort”. This will see GB Energy customers switched en masse, and they have been assured that the Co-op will be honouring any credit balances. The company has also surprised observers by offering the same tariff terms as charged by GB Energy.
The cost of protecting the credit balances will be partly met by Co-operative Energy, with the rest being covered by Ofgem from a fund built up from a levy spread across all energy suppliers. If further suppliers fail then the same process will come into play, Ofgem has said.
Meanwhile, questions remain as to how well the switch of GB Energy customers will be managed, given that Co-operative Energy has in effect added another 75% of customers overnight. Just last month, Ofgem forced the firm to pay £1.8m compensation for customer service failings. A new IT system had left households being unable to log into their accounts, submit meter readings or check their bill – and the complaints rolled in.
“The best that can happen is that things go smoothly,” says Malinowski. “The worst doesn’t bear thinking about. If I was a GB Energy customer I would not be keeping my fingers crossed hoping for a miracle. There are cheaper and safer options with other energy suppliers. Time to switch. Seriously.”
British Gas and e.on have become the latest of the “big six” energy suppliers to say they are freezing standard gas and electricity tariffs this winter.
British Gas says the move will provide peace of mind for more than six million customers, and follows similar action by SSE, which confirmed it will cap standard household tariffs until April 2017. British Gas said the fact that it had “forward bought” its energy had allowed it to make the announcement.
However, MoneySavingExpert Martin Lewis warned consumers not to be taken in by the claim. “If you are on the British Gas standard tariff, like all big six standard tariffs you are already massively overpaying. For someone on typical use, you’re paying £1,040 a year.
“If you’re willing to change company, the savings are getting on for £180 a year at typical usage, and much more for many customers who have bigger bills. And those tariffs are one year fixed, so they’re cheaper and you’re locked in with a guarantee of no hikes for far longer,” he says.
The independent green supplier Good Energy was the first company to announce a winter price freeze back on 19 October.
I am applying for jobs as a school librarian. I hold a master’s degree in information and library studies and have seven years’ experience working as a school librarian.
The last job I applied for, I phoned before sending in my application and asked whether it would be possible to have a look around the library and to meet the librarian. The school responded quickly and I visited the following day. I was impressed with the library space and could see by the friendly behaviour of the students that the current librarian was well liked.
I sent her a thank you card after my visit and then promptly sent in my application. I was one of seven applicants, but I did not get the job.
There were a number of things we were asked to do on the day of our interview, including being interviewed by a panel of students and another with two senior members of the school. When it was my turn for the student panel, the librarian was also in the room but she did not acknowledge me. I noticed the students looked to her at one point and I would have looked, too, only it seemed rude to turn my attention away from the students. Of the seven applicants, I was rated least liked by the student panel.
Is it no longer appropriate to ask to look around a school library prior to applying to a job being advertised? Or to do what I consider essential research? My feeling is that I do not enhance my chances of being hired by doing so and that I may actually be creating an atmosphere of mistrust. I am applying for another job in a school library and would have asked to have a look around only, and perhaps meet people involved, but I don’t want to lower my chances of being chosen.
From your description of events, I find it difficult to understand how this preliminary visit to the library could have adversely affected your chances of being offered the job. You say that when you were being interviewed by the students, the librarian whom you had met before failed to acknowledge you. You seem to have interpreted this as hostility on her part but I feel certain that she was scrupulously avoiding any gesture that might have suggested to the students that, unlike the other applicants, you were already known to her. It seems to me unlikely that asking to look around a library in preparation for an interview as its librarian could create an “atmosphere of mistrust”.
I find it insensitive of them to have told you that, out of the seven applicants, the student panel rated you least liked – but this, surely, is a more likely explanation for your lack of success than your preliminary visit.
If you’ve got it into your head that looking around the library before the next interview could count against you, don’t do it.
• I don’t work in education, but when I recruit I always think highly of people who contact us first and ask lots of sensible questions. Of course, asking silly questions puts me off, so people should remember that every contact is essentially part of the interview. IsaacNewt
• I don’t think your looking around had anything to do with it. You clearly just failed the student panel. I did at one of my applications. Personally, I don’t think they are a fair test as I am one of those teachers who is not liked initially but is popular after a few months of teaching. I get good results. But because I am not a comedian or a lad, I don’t do well with student panels. Treflesg
• You are too focused on the librarian and not enough on the students. In a role like that, interacting with students is key. You can’t come last in that category and expect the job. weeblewobbler
• The internal candidate probably got the job. I don’t think much of the main criterion being whether the students like you. What is this – a beauty contest? Steve Jones
I work as a European grants manager. My position, although probably OK for the next couple of years, doesn’t have a future in post-Brexit Britain. To add to this, I don’t particularly enjoy the job and it isn’t a career I would have chosen. I studied an arts degree and took temping work in the public sector to pay the bills alongside the unpaid or poorly paid work I was doing for a small theatre company.
Nearly 10 years later, I feel stuck in this line of work, but my particular field is drying up fast and will probably end as our ties with the EU are severed. Along the way, I have had experience in project management, financial planning, communication, training, events and marketing. However, “transferable skills” seem to be a thing of the past, and the creative sector I long to work in seems to have a tightly guarded door.
Taking a pay cut isn’t really viable with my current mortgage payments, and although I have looked into getting some career coaching the costs are out of my reach and the results seem to be hit and miss.
Although you don’t particularly enjoy your job, it sounds to be reasonably secure for the next couple of years, so if you start exploring soon you will have the luxury of job-hunting without the distracting pressure of unemployment.
My advice is this: don’t give up on the creative sector just because it seems to operate behind that tightly guarded door. Ten years as a grant manager will have equipped you with experience and skills of direct relevance to many creative enterprises. But don’t just scan the job ads: use the time that you have to identify a few potential employers within the sector – chosen because they particularly appeal to you and are located conveniently. Then find out as much as you possibly can about them. If at all possible, become acquainted with people who already work there. And then, knowing a bit about their working methods, work out in what way you believe you could be of real value to them.
Go through this process with, say, three such organisations, then write each one a detailed submission of why you would love to work with them and precisely how you could help. Say that you recognise there is probably no immediate vacancy but ask them to keep your letter on file. Send gentle reminders every six months. You have every chance of finally landing the sort of job you’ve always wanted.
• People change jobs – and industries – all the time. If you have demonstrable skills and experience in the fields that you list I should think you will be a very attractive employee to a whole range of organisations. Quake42
• Life is too short to be stuck in a career you don’t enjoy. If you want to work in a creative field, just do it. You have to make change happen – it very rarely happens by accident. floaty_116
• Look beyond our borders while you still can. Rent out the house to cover the mortgage and get going. It’s surprising what a drastic change can do to one’s morale. gilstra
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
Any answers? The sound on my TV is a bit crap, so a friend suggested I get a soundbar. I know nothing about them. Are they really that much better, and how easy are they to set up for a tech numptie? Can readers recommend a good one that won’t break the bank?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
It’s the ethical Christmas gift that can throw a financial lifeline to people in poorer countries who are trying to improve their lives. Lendwithcare gift vouchers allow Britons to lend relatively small sums of money to people in 11 countries who are keen to start or grow their own small business – and the occupied Palestinian territories have now been added to the list of locations, meaning it is possible to lend money to individuals and families in the West Bank and Gaza. People such as Tayseer Ghanem, a 58-year-old farmer, and Walaa Shaltaf who runs a beauty salon.
Guardian Money has previously featured the vouchers, which for a limited time are available as a “buy one, get one free”. So if you are struggling for a present for a loved one, how about the gift that really does keep on giving? Alternatively, there are plenty of other ethical Christmas gifts for those looking for something that will transform people’s lives or help the planet (see below).
Lendwithcare is a peer-to-peer microfinance website set up by aid charity Care International UK, which fights poverty and injustice around the world. When you buy someone a Lendwithcare gift voucher, they then go online and choose an individual who they are going to lend the money to. It might be a rice farmer in Cambodia, a market stall holder in Zambia or a taxi driver in Ecuador. In most cases the voucher will be a contribution towards the total amount the entrepreneur is looking for. He or she will use the money to start or expand their small business, thereby helping them to feed their family and send their children to school.
The idea is that the loan will be repaid, and the voucher recipient can either keep the money or “recycle” it by lending it to another budding entrepreneur, and then another.
The vouchers are available in various amounts from £15 upwards and can be emailed to the recipient or printed out and tucked inside a Christmas card. Previous recipients of the vouchers have told the charity that it was one of their favourite gifts “because it gets the whole family gathered around the computer to pick an entrepreneur to help”.
Remember that these are loans, not handouts. The money is paid back – typically over anything from four to 36 months depending on the recipient’s plans for it – in instalments to the local microfinance institution (MFI) that has partnered with Care International in that country. The MFI then transfers these repayments to Care International, which credits them to the UK lender’s Lendwithcare account.
Since their launch in 2010, more than 33,000 people – many of them Guardian readers – have lent more than £11.5m to 46,400 entrepreneurs, helping people in Togo, Benin, Cambodia, Vietnam, Ecuador, Pakistan, Philippines, Malawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Rwanda and, now, the occupied Palestinian territories.
While Care International works extensively across the Middle East, this is Lendwithcare’s first activity in the region. It has teamed up with a local MFI called Reef Finance, which operates in the West Bank and Gaza, and specialises in providing agricultural, business, housing and personal loans to individuals – typically for things such as greenhouses and livestock.
“The Palestinian territories are within a volatile region, but more than 4.4 million people live in the West Bank and Gaza and, like everywhere, they need to earn a living,” the charity says. “We believe that in helping people to increase their income and tackle poverty, they may become less vulnerable to the effects of conflict and will be in a better position to … continue with their livelihoods during peacetime, and to be more hopeful about the future.”
The amounts being sought vary. Tayseer Ghanem, for example, is seeking a loan of $2,000 (£1,600) to buy agricultural materials such as fertiliser, seeds and pesticide. A farmer all his life, the married father-of-four has a greenhouse and grows tomatoes, cucumbers, aubergines and other vegetables which he sells through a co-operative.
Walaa Shaltaf, meanwhile, is looking for a $3,000 loan (£2,400). Divorced and living with her parents, Shaltaf started working in salons 13 years ago when she finished her basic education, and recently opened her own, Beautiful All The Time. She feels she would boost her income if she offered more treatments and sold beauty products at the salon, so she plans to buy creams, cosmetics and other items, plus additional equipment. She also wants to hire an assistant.
Lendwithcare says that, as with all its MFI partners, the organisations it is working with in the occupied territories “have undergone rigorous research and are deemed to have met our stringent ethical criteria”. It adds: “Due to the elevated security situation in the region, our partners and entrepreneurs in the West Bank and Gaza undergo additional verification.” In most cases, the MFI partner there will buy and deliver the items requested by an entrepreneur and financed by Lendwithcare.
To date, only 10 Lendwithcare loans have ever defaulted – a pretty impressive statistic. In the case of five of these the individuals died, and the other five were made to groups in Malawi who lost their businesses or incurred difficulties because of severe floods.
This Christmas the charity’s buy one, get one free offer means that if you buy a gift voucher, you’ll also get a £15 voucher free (though this portion can’t be withdrawn after it is paid back).
This year’s crop of ethical Christmas gifts range from chickens and shares in a wind turbine to composting toilets for refugee camps and wash-cloths for keeping camels’ udders clean, writes Rupert Jones. The charity goat is also present and correct.
The Good Gifts website, run by the Charities Advisory Trust, has a goat for £25, or two for £45. Present Aid, which supports the work of Christian Aid, is offering a kid goat for £9 and a nanny goat for £22. Oxfam has them, too, and is offering a free milk chocolate goat with every Oxfam Unwrapped gift card order until Friday 9 December.
Some of the more offbeat gifts we found include: a kit for making banana wine, a popular drink in Malawi (£25 from Present Aid); the aforementioned wash-cloths for Kenyan camels (£15 from Good Gifts); “a pile of poo”, which is a mix of manure and organic fertiliser, plus some training in eco-friendly farming techniques (£9 from Oxfam’s online shop); and an acre of rainforest (£52 from Good Gifts – or those with deep pockets can treat someone to 25 acres for £1,300).
With some of the websites, including Present Aid, the money will go towards relevant projects rather than being used to buy that animal or item. However, sites such as Good Gifts guarantee that your money buys the described gift.
Meanwhile, the Small Wind Co-op is offering wind energy gift certificates, available in any amount from a minimum of £100. Available until 16 December, these can be exchanged for shares in the co-op which is building three wind turbines in Scotland and Wales. So far, it has attracted more than 350 members and raised more than £1.1m to fund the installation of farm-scale turbines in Wemyss Bay and Inverclyde in Scotland, and Ceredigion in Mid Wales. Projected average annual returns for shareholders are 6.5% over 20 years, says a spokeswoman.
Meanwhile, waste company London Junk is offering what it calls “the world’s first ever waste collection experience day gift package”. You might think they would pay you to get elbow-deep in the capital’s rubbish, but this comes with a £300 price-tag.
Ethical Consumer, which describes itself as the UK’s leading alternative consumer magazine, has a Christmas gift guidefor those on the hunt for present ideas. It mentions Hive.co.uk as “a great alternative to Amazon” for books, combining online shopping with support for local shops. The magazine’s best buys for perfume and aftershave include Dolma, Neal’s Yard Remedies, Florame and Pacifica. These are all vegan and not tested on animals. On the clothing front, People Tree is described as a stand-out best buy, and on the high street H&M, Marks & Spencer and New Look are all recommended.
If you are still to buy your Christmas cards this year, writes Miles Brignall, we recommend as a Guardian Money best-buy the handmade cards from Sreepur in Bangladesh, from which 100% of the purchase price goes to charity.
The Sreepur Village charity, two hours north of the country’s capital, Dhaka, cares for up to 100 destitute women and 500 abandoned children. Started 25 years ago by former British Airways flight attendant Pat Kerr, it now helps fund itself from the sale of the cards it makes. You can hand over your money safe in the knowledge that the organisation has made a real difference: in 2009 we visited the project and were so impressed that we have promoted the cards ever since. A pack of 16 costs £14.75, delivered in the UK.
At the heart of the project is a paper-making facility. Women from the local community have been trained to produce it from locally grown jute, and the cards are decorated in return for a living wage – money that makes a huge difference to their lives. British Airways flies the cards to the UK for free, while volunteers collect and distribute them here. This ensures all the money spent on the cards goes directly to Sreepur.
For more info and to buy the cards go to sreepurcards.org. Cards are sent within 24 hours of an order being placed.
UK train fares to go up by 2.3% in 2017
Time has stood still inside the lounge and two bedrooms, and you will want to give the the place an overhaul before you settle in. But lapsed planning permission allows for the large Sunday school room of this old Methodist chapel to be added to the accommodation, creating an extra storey. Price: £99,950. H&H King , 01228 810799
The pound has closed at its highest level against the euro in three months after nervous currency traders adopted a cautious approach ahead of Italy’s constitutional referendum on Sunday.
With the poll in the eurozone’s third-biggest economy too close to call, fears that a no vote would risk a fresh economic and political crisis pushed sterling to a fifth successive week of gains against the single currency, the pound’s best run in nine weeks.
The pound was up by more than half a cent against the euro to trade at just under €1.19 and was also up against the US dollar, despite a fall in unemployment.
Investor sentiment towards the pound has strengthened in recent days after the Brexit secretary, David Davis, said the UK might pay to secure future access to the European single market and nervousness grew about the outcome of the Italian vote.
Tsvetoslav Tsonev, an economist at Fathom Consulting, said: “Concerns about Italy’s constitutional referendum and its implications are weighing on markets. They are right to be concerned.
“If the outcome results in another economic downturn, causing sovereign bond yields to spike, it could prove to be the straw that broke the camel’s back, triggering a banking crisis and eventually Italy’s exit from the euro area.”
Investors in shares and bonds preferred to adopt a wait-and-see approach ahead of the Italian referendum, which supporters hope will simplify the country’s lawmaking system by reducing the authority of one of its parliamentary chambers.
Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, has said he will resign if he loses the vote, but hard evidence of public opinion has been hard to gauge because opinion polls are banned in the final two weeks before the referendum.
Shares on Milan’s stock market were barely changed on the day, with bourses in Paris and Frankfurt showing small losses. London’s FTSE 100 closed 22 points lower at 6730.72. 
The Rev Mike and the Rev Nicky-Sue Terry have the classic married couple’s habit of finishing each other’s sentences. But perhaps it’s unsurprising that they know each other’s minds so well. They are not just man and wife, but also two halves of a pioneering job-share within the Church of England, splitting the role of vicar for St Mary’s in the Hampshire village of Warsash between them.
They take turns conducting services, he chairs parish council meetings, she runs the pastoral team, and vicarage life is divided according to individual strengths, although both try to take Fridays off. Mike, who previously served in the Royal Navy, likes long-term planning; Nicky-Sue says she prefers “to get into the detail of things, which … ” – she pauses, and Mike interjects – “drives me completely barmy”. Some parishioners in distress are drawn to her, some to him, but they try to make the relationship seamless. “We have a phrase we use,” says Mike, “which is: ‘We are the vicar, we are.’”
And both are thrilled to have a way of working that suits them. Having entered the church late in life – Mike, now 60, met 54-year-old Nicky-Sue in 2007, when both were training for ordination – neither wanted to run a church full-time, and so when their bishop suggested an experimental job share, both were intrigued. “In a sense, this is the Church of England beginning to recognise that we can do things in a more flexible way, and can be responsive to a modern environment,” Mike adds. “It’s a very positive reflection on a changing world. And if the Church of England can do it, that says something.”
Thirteen years after Tony Blair’s government pushed through the legal right to request flexible working amid squeals of protest, it feels as if the last bastions of traditional working practices are finally being stormed. Change is lapping at the highest reaches of the establishment; the armed forces, parliament and the judiciary.
Next spring, a landmark report is due to be published exploring the feasibility of job-sharing for MPs, to encourage parents and disabled candidates into parliament. The Ministry of Defence is in the middle of a trial project, offering soldiers with young children the chance to defer deployment overseas or rejig chunks of leave to reduce their hours. The scheme will be opened to more service personnel from February.
Two unnamed judges recently began the high court’s first ever job-share, and last week it emerged that future vacancies on the supreme court will be open to flexible applications in the hope of attracting female judges. (Currently the ratio is one woman to 11 men.)
The next big leap in the story, says the Fawcett Society’s chief executive Sam Smethers, would be moving to a default assumption that every job can be made flexible in some way – early starts or finishes, home working, part-time work or job-sharing – unless there is good reason not to. But that means showing it can work even at the top, and in professions once stoutly resistant to change.
“It’s about opening minds and realising that a lot of the way we do things is just because we’ve always done it that way,” she adds, “not because that’s the way it has to be done. In most jobs there is some prospect of flexible working.”
The niggling question, however, is how firmly these painstaking gains for working parents are entrenched in workplace culture: there are fears that, in a potentially tougher economic climate post-Brexit, it might become too easy to roll back employment rights. This is why it is so intriguing that even professions granted exemption from the law are now voluntarily thinking the previously unthinkable.
The single biggest reason for leaving the armed forces, according to the annual Armed Forces Continuous Attitude Survey, is the impact on family life – and it’s not just affecting women. There is growing concern about promising male officers leaving in their 30s and early 40s, just as experience becomes invaluable, because of the toll taken on marriages and children. It is this prospect of troops voting with their feet that has prompted a rethink of the rigid patterns of army life.
If the role of military wives was once to stay at home raising children while their men were off at war, those days are long gone. Almost one in 10 soldiers is now female, many military spouses work, and too many struggle to fit that around their soldier’s long absences and unpredictable hours. In a recent survey for the Army Families Federation (AFF), which has campaigned for flexible working on forces families’ behalves, 39% of spouses said their partner couldn’t help with childcare even occasionally. (For soldiers not on active deployment, variable start times and other forms of flexibility may be be available, but the forces are exempt from the legal right to request).
“You can’t rely on your soldier to finish at fixed times. They’re away a lot and the burden of the childcare absolutely falls on the spouses,” explains Louise Simpson, policy and research director at the AFF, and an army wife herself.
“If you talk to an organisation like Recruit for Spouses, which helps military spouses return to work, they’re trying to place people who were in incredible jobs [before becoming] military spouses, who are now downsizing considerably and finding even that difficult. Employers look at their CVs and say: ‘Oh, we can’t have someone this highly qualified.’” Yet many spouses can’t afford, she says, not to work.
Simpson praises the army’s current chief of general staff, General Sir Nick Carter, who personally backed the flexible working experiment last year by declaring there was “absolutely no reason” for not changing parade times on a base so that soldiers could do the school run. Tiny changes could, Simpson says, make a big difference.
But the Ministry of Defence remains cautious about the impact on operational readiness to deploy. The trial will continue until at least 2019 before any final decision is taken.
Meanwhile, the AFF argues that more could be done to spread the message that modern couples both work and need to share the domestic load. “We need to educate our command that this is the way most people operate now, so if every now and then a soldier wants to leave at 4pm to pick up the kids, they could,” says Simpson. But there is some private anxiety about the consequences of taking up the offer: one new mother Simpson talked to recently said her soldier husband wouldn’t take up the scheme because he worried that “it would be an end to the fast track”. For both civilian and military parents, the key may be making sure that flexibility goes right to the top of the tree.
At first glance, judges make terrible candidates for part-time working, since the same judge must sit continuously through trials that can last weeks. But the crown court now has a handful of part-timers, working in blocks of several weeks on and several weeks off – and the supreme court’s cases are shorter and more predictable than criminal trials, which makes them potentially more amenable to part-timers if they were carefully matched to cases. A final decision has yet to be taken on what kind of hours will be accepted, but crucially, candidates won’t have to declare that they want to work flexibly unless they are short-listed, meaning their CVs should be sifted purely on merit.
Since most supreme court justices are in their late 50s and 60s, the changes are unlikely to attract new mothers, but could suit someone seeking reduced hours because they are caring for an elderly parent, or to see teenagers through A-levels. And more than that, it sends a powerful signal through the system. “What we’re saying is that, actually, we appreciate people are looking to us to take the lead,” said a spokesman for the supreme court.
What kind of boss denies women the legal right to maternity leave, requires them to commute hundreds of miles a week and calls them lazy if they complain? The answer, technically, is all of us. MPs are not legally employees, but servants of the people, and the people can be unforgiving bosses. Ironically, the law on working life is currently made by people whose working conditions would be illegal almost anywhere else.
The Labour MP Rachel Reeves has just written a biography of the pioneering Labour minister Alice Bacon, Alice in Westminster, in which she reflects on how life has changed for female politicians since Alice’s election in 1945. “The hours have massively changed, the through-the-night sittings that existed in her day – the latest I’ve been there is maybe 1.30am,” says Reeves, who has two children under three years old. “There’s a nursery now, whereas when Alice was an MP very few women had children. There was a feeling you couldn’t have both. Those are choices that women are much less willing to make now.”
But the flipside of afternoon and evening sittings was that some MPs in Alice’s day treated parliament as a part-time job, pursuing careers in law or the City during the day. Time could be interestingly elastic, if what you wanted was the freedom to make money, not the freedom to see your children.
And while back then established MPs might have deigned to visit their constituency only once a year, the weekly shuttle back and forth is the bane of many modern political parents’ lives. Since there’s no way around the need to live in two places at once without breaking the constituency link, there is growing interest in job-sharing, with two candidates standing for parliament on one ticket and dividing the work between them.
Two Green activists, Sarah Cope and Clare Phipps, brought an unsuccessful court case last year arguing they should be allowed to stand for parliament as a job-share, and this week the Green MP Caroline Lucas – who shares her own party’s leadership with Jonathan Bartley – once again backed the idea.
But it remains controversial, dividing even those passionate about opening up parliament. Reeves thinks ministerial posts could be shared relatively easily, but worries about how an MP job-share would cope if its two halves disagreed over an unexpected issue, such as the vote on bombing Syria: “For me, that was an incredibly difficult decision. I had friends who politically I’m very close to who voted the other way. I’m not sure how you agree that in advance. Do you just say: ‘Well, it’s a Wednesday, so that’s Rachel’s day to vote?’ That doesn’t feel right. I personally think it’s incredibly difficult.”
Nonetheless, two academics, Bristol University’s Prof Sarah Childs – author of a separate recent report on diversifying the Commons, currently being studied by a working group of MPs – and Birkbeck University’s Dr Rosie Campbell, are examining the practical challenges for a report due next spring.
The urgent priority for many in Westminster, however, remains dragging arrangements for new parents into the 21st century. Ministers have been able to take maternity leave since 2001, but new mothers still have no formal right to time off constituency work. Most muddle through, reliant on the goodwill of whips to excuse them from voting at Westminster, while braced for criticism over their temporarily patchy presence. Reeves recalls signing casework shortly after her second child was born last June, and resuming constituency surgeries within six weeks. Despite being signed off Westminster votes for four months, she turned up to vote on Syria and tax credit cuts. “I was never completely off,” she says, before adding hastily, “but I’m sure that’s true for people in other jobs as well.”
Why don’t MPs complain more about conditions most parents wouldn’t tolerate? Reeves snorts incredulously at the question: “Because you get no sympathy!” Besides, she says, there’s flexibility in the school holidays when MPs work from their constituencies. “I don’t think we have loads to complain about. We’re a bit like self-employed people, who can’t take maternity leave because it’s going to cost you.”
The snail’s pace of reform in parliament undoubtedly reflects private fears of a backlash from voters still smarting over the expenses scandal. But Childs remains optimistic about the prospects for change, arguing that it is in nobody’s interest if MPs “have to rely on good relations with the whips” to get time off to recover from childbirth.
She is struck, too, by the way the wave of SNP MPs elected in 2015 are starting to change the dynamic. Used to the more modern Scottish parliament, which keeps something closer to office hours, she says they are much more willing to question stuffier traditions: “They’re able to make comparisons, and they look around and say: ‘Why are we doing this the way we do?’”
And as the two vicars of St Mary’s found out, that can be a life-changing question. “When we started, it was an experiment; we had no sense that we would do what we do now,” says Nicky-Sue, who thinks a job share might never have occurred to them without their bishop’s prompting. “But there’s something very symbolic about it, a married couple sharing a post like this. It’s perhaps a challenging concept. But it’s a beautiful one.”
What’s going for it? I have deeply etched childhood memories of Rye. We came here often, Mum and Dad perhaps harbouring fantasies of moving to its medieval streets when we won the pools. Now I come here often, accompanied by much the same vain hopes. In the intervening four decades, little has altered, bar the arrival of boutique hotels, boutique cinemas and better coffee. Rye, after all, has been around the block and seen it all before, even unruly, egocentric demagogues striding across the globe. (This was once a command centre against Napoleon’s potential invasion.) You’d think Rye’s prettiness would be its undoing. But no. Even the annual deluge of summer tourists fails to dent its astonishing character. This is a town, though, best approached in winter, hunkered down, hatches battened against the maritime gusts, with the sun low over Camber Sands and a flaming log or two in the fireplace at the George.
The case against Read the Mapp & Lucia novels. Occasional tweeness. A few too many gift shops. Preserved, but when a place looks this good…
Well connected? Trains: Hastings (18 mins), Ashford (22 mins), Eastbourne (44 mins) and Brighton (1hr 25 mins); changing at Ashford, you can be at London St Pancras in 1hr 23 mins. Driving: tricky; the A259 coast road is twisty and busy; 30 mins to Hastings, or Ashford and the M20.
Schools Primaries: Rye Community and nearby St Michael’s CofE are “good”, Ofsted says. Secondaries: Rye College is “good”.
Hang out at… The delightful new cinema, the Kino, followed by a snifter at the George or Ypres Castle. Lots of choice for dinner, from the Ambrette to the Landgate to fish and chips.
Where to buy Anywhere you can. Caught between marshes and the Weald, Rye huddles tightly round its hilltop. Everywhere is lovely, though the A259 circling the town can get cloggy, with consequences for the houses lining it. There are few opportunities for sprawling suburbans; a few around Military Road or Playden. Rye Harbour is worth a look, too. Large detacheds and town houses, £500,000-£1.4m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £350,000-£500,000. Semis, £240,000-£450,000. Terraces and cottages, £200,000-£350,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £700pcm; a three-bedroom house, £1,100pcm.
Bargain of the week I’ll race you for this one. Listed, two-bedroom terrace house, needing modernisation, £265,000 with Phillips & Stubbs, phillipsandstubbs.co.uk.
Phil Law “A welcoming haven for writers and creatives, but it’s impossible to buy anything useful as it’s all coffee shops and chintz.”
• Do you live in Rye? Join the debate below.
Live in Streatham, south London? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 6 December.
The Dorchester’s leaked list of grooming rules for female staff could open up the luxury hotel to lawsuits filed by current and former employees, critics have said.
A set of grooming demands was this week reported to have been emailed by hotel managers to employees after the five-star establishment received complaints about the general hygiene of its staff.
According to the leak, women were asked not to turn up for work with oily skin, bad breath or garish makeup. They were also encouraged to shave their legs, ensure their fingernails were manicured and avoid body odour.
Kiran Daurka, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said dress codes were lawful when they related directly to the requirements of a job, but could be challenged when they encouraged the objectification of staff.
“I would have concerns where a policy seemingly objectifies women by asking them to look a certain way which has no bearing on their ability to do a job,” she told the Guardian. “For example, hair removal is clearly about objectification and sexualisation, as there is some ideal of what a woman should look like.
“This may also unlawfully offend the religious or other beliefs of women whose belief system does not allow the removal of hair.
“A dress code that treats women less favourably than men is discriminatory. But even where a policy is applied to all, it may still particularly disadvantage women, and that disadvantage would need to be objectively justified.”
An unnamed employee told the Daily Mail: “It’s disgusting. This list is like something out of the dark ages and downright offensive. It’s not as though you choose to have oily skin, and a lot of women, especially teenagers, cannot help it – no facial wash or moisturiser in the world can control that.
“The women are all pretty livid but worry that if they complain – or rebel and turn up to work with chipped, dirty nails and hairy legs, for example – they’ll be sacked on the spot.”
Philip Landau, an employment lawyer from Landau Law, said there were many reasons why an employer may want to have a dress code or appearance policy, such as to communicate a professional and corporate image. However, “an employer’s policy must not be discriminatory in respect of the protected characteristics in the 2010 Equality Act for age, disability, gender reassignment, religion or belief, sex, or sexual orientation”, he said.
“Accordingly, any dress code or appearance policy should apply to both men and women equally. The codes do not have to be identical, as there will clearly be different requirements for male staff, but it does have to amount to similar standards. It is not clear what the equivalent grooming policy is for male staff at the Dorchester.
“A grooming policy should also be reasonable and proportionate in nature, with particular reference to the work that is being carried out. If it isn’t, and you are dismissed for failing to comply with the code, you may have a claim for direct discrimination on the grounds of sex if there has been a detriment for one gender over the other. You may also have a claim for unfair dismissal.”
Landau said employers needed to “tread carefully” in case they were seen to indirectly discriminate against an employee. The requirement not to display any excess body hair, including on the face, could discriminate against those with conditions such as polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), of which one of the main symptoms is excess androgen – high levels of “male hormones” in the body.
“This may cause physical signs, such as excess facial or body hair, and therefore a blanket policy of no facial hair could amount to indirect discrimination on the grounds of disability and sex,” he said.
Ewa Jasiewicz, a union organiser for hotel workers in London, said she believed the stipulations left workers open to discrimination, especially if they were transgender or gender fluid. “Gender is a protected characteristic under the Equality Act and this includes gender presentation and reassignment,” Jasiewicz said.
“Women workers at the Dorchester do not enjoy transparency on where their service charge goes and do not have fair tips or [a] living wage, but are expected to spend money on manicures? This beggars belief. This in my opinion is a form of paternalistic, sexist, gendered taxation on an already exploited and underpaid female workforce.”
The Unite regional officer Dave Turnbull said: “People of different ethnic backgrounds may not be able to comply with the requirements due to their skin or hair type.
“It is possible that there is an underlying race issue here, as we are often told by members that hotels do try to avoid having black people in front-of-house position and it could easily be interpreted that the Dorchester are trying to get female staff to conform to a certain type.
“Also there are religions where the removal of facial hair may not be acceptable. There may be disability issues linked to this as well, for example skin conditions or allergies to certain types of makeup.”
To apply these standards only to female staff would be clearly sexist, he said. “It treats women workers as if they are part of the product that is being sold by the hotel and can place staff at risk of sexual harassment and comments from customers who might view them as a commodity.”
Workers in the Dorchester and other hotels were on low basic pay and often reliant on variable elements, such as tips or service charges, to top up their earnings, Turnbull said. “The cost of makeup, beauty treatments and compliance with dress code requirements can be extremely expensive and is never factored in by an additional allowance of any sort. Again, this could easily place employers at risk of claims of sex discrimination, as male employees are not expected to shoulder the same expenses.”
An employee at another London hotel, who asked to remain anonymous, said she was subjected to similar rules. She told the Guardian her main issue was that female employees had to wear tight dresses, which was “unfair and impractical” for her waitressing job. It also opened her up to unwanted comments from colleagues and guests. “If I’m cleaning a table, male workers will say things like: ‘Oh, stay right there,’” she said.
While the rules do not stipulate that the waitress must remove any facial hair, the 24-year-old, employed by a boutique hotel frequented by wealthy clients, said she had to wear skin-coloured tights rather than black ones, which meant having to shave her legs regularly, and that there was an expectation to look attractive. “We’re told that we have to dress as if we’re on our first date,” she said.
Sam Smethers, the chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said it was completely unacceptable for any woman to be told what she should wear and how she should look. “Employers should concentrate on what enables people to do a good job and what drives productivity. This is 2016, not 1970; we need to see an end to this kind of objectification of women,” she said.
The Dorchester said the rules were not emailed to all staff, but were provided to job applicants. The hotel’s general manager, Roland Fasel, said: “The Dorchester has a proud community of employees who uphold world-leading hospitality standards, including grooming, in line with many other brands.
“All new applicants, both men and women, are sent a copy of our grooming standards in advance of interview.”
The number of homes in Spain sold to British buyers has slumped since the Brexit vote and the fall in the value of the pound.
Sales in the third quarter of this year declined 16% after steadily increasing since 2011. Last year the strong pound led British buyers to purchase almost 10,000 Spanish properties, up 42% on 2014, giving them a 21% share of the number of homes acquired by international buyers.
No other nationality buys as much property in Spain as the British, and in recent years they have made a significant contribution to the recovery of the Spanish property market.
About 28% of holiday homes on the Costa del Sol are sold to Britons and 26% on the Costa Blanca. They also dominate the sales of holiday homes in Murcia, the Canary Islands and the Balearics.
“We have carried out a survey of the sector and it appears that house purchases by Brits on the Costa del Sol and the Costa Blanca have fallen by around 50% since the referendum,” said Mark Stucklin, of the Second-Home and Resort Industry Observatory.
“At first it was the uncertainty after the Brexit vote, and then the fall in the pound,” said Catriona Hogan, marketing director at yourVIVA, a holiday homes estate agent on the Costa del Sol.
“About 40% of our clients are British and we’ve seen that drop to around 30%. There’s still a lot of interest but there’s a wait-and-see attitude as people are watching to see what happens with the pound. Things are picking up a little now.”
Stucklin pointed out that the market had always closely mirrored the fluctuation in the pound-to-euro exchange rate. The pound is currently down 18% compared with the end of 2015.
“When the pound fell below €1.20, from 2009-13, Britons bought fewer than 5,000 homes a year compared [with] nearly 10,000 in 2015,” he said.
“If the trend continues it will have a significant impact on the Costa Brava and Costa Blanca markets, among others.
“While demand from other countries such as Germany, Belgium, Sweden and France is growing, in the short term it’s not enough to make up for the lost British buyers.”
The 2.3% average UK rail fare rises for 2017 are being driven by much higher increases on the reprivatised Virgin Trains East Coast, where ticket prices set by the operator will far outstrip the rate of inflation.
While regulated fares such as season tickets and off-peak returns, which are set by the government, are to increase by 1.9%, fares on Virgin Trains East Coast will increase by 4.9% overall.
The rail firm said that would be hiking the fares it controls by an average of around 5.5%.
An off-peak single from London to Edinburgh on the east coast line, which now costs £128.20, will be £137.20 – 7% more – in January, while a London-to-Newcastle single also goes up 7% to £131.70.
Virgin will also be raising the average train fares it controls on its west coast intercity service from London to Manchester and Glasgow, with overall fares rising by 2.4%.
Fares will also rise by an average of 2.4% on First Group’s Great Western Railway. The German-owned Arriva has not responded to confirm the overall fare rises on its franchises, but some long-distance anytime fares on its Cross Country appear to be rising sharply: for example Bristol to Darlington will be 4.8% more expensive, at £149 for a single.
On some franchises, such as Govia Thameslink Railway – including Southern – Southeastern, Greater Anglia and National Express’s C2C, fares set by the operator will actually slightly trail the government’s increase next year, with average fares rising by 1.8% on each. East Midland and South West fares will rise by 1.5%. First’s TransPennine Express said it would freeze advance fares, meaning an overall rise of 1.4%.
Virgin said it was tackling “historic anomalies” and would be making 10,000 more discounted advance fares available every week on the east coast line for those booking ahead. It said that despite the 2017 rises, “standard anytime” tickets on long distance journeys were still 4% cheaper than when Virgin Trains took over the franchise in March 2015.
However, it has already been accused of making several “stealth hikes” to fares – including removing some of the cheapest advance fares in the first few months after it took over the franchise.
The rail firm – a partnership between Richard Branson’s Virgin and the transport group Stagecoach – won the franchise in March 2015, when it was controversially reprivatised by the coalition government after more than five years of operation in the public sector.
Passenger numbers have not risen in line with projections from the time of the bid, leaving the operator struggling to meet the £3.3bn in premiums it has promised to pay the Treasury by 2023, with the bulk of that due in the later years of the eight-year franchise. 
David Horne, the Virgin Trains managing director on the east coast route, said: “The changes we’re making on 1 January will see more advance fares available, making it easier for those that can book ahead to grab a bargain.”
Train fares across Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% from January, according to figures released by the industry body, the Rail Delivery Group. 
Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport condemned the increase, warning that some passengers were “finding themselves priced off the railways”.
She said: “Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase by 23.5%, and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government to give them a truly affordable railway.”
Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators and Network Rail, said: “We understand how passengers feel when fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven’t always got the service they pay for.
“Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the payments train companies make to government.”
But Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, the train drivers’ union, said: “It is scandalous that the government is allowing the privatised train companies to make even more money for providing an ever poorer service. This new price hike – well above the rate of inflation – is indefensible.”
Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said Labour was committed to returning franchises to public ownership to “put an end to Britain’s rip-off railways”. He added: “Passengers are told that higher fares are necessary to fund investment, but vital projects have been delayed by years. Rail fares have risen by 25% on average in the last six years alone, whilst real wages remain below their 2008 levels.
“Money that could be used to keep fares down or reinvested to improve our services is instead subsidising the profits of private companies and other nations’ railway systems – it’s a scandal.”
Train fares in Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% next year, the rail industry has announced. The figure is the average increase across all rail tickets and will take effect from 2 January.
Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport condemned the increase, warning that some passengers were “finding themselves priced off the railways”.
She said: “The train operating companies and the government need to work closely together to provide fairer, simpler and cheaper fares making sure people are always sold the cheapest ticket available.
“Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase by 23.5% and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government to give them a truly affordable railway.”
Etkind accused the government of dragging its feet over the introduction of flexible season tickets with “fair discounts” for the 8 million part-time workers across the UK.
“It is not right that part-time workers have to buy expensive one-off tickets, or season tickets, which they then waste on the days they don’t work,” she said.
Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators and Network Rail, said: “We understand how passengers feel when fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven’t always got the service they pay for.
“Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the payments train companies make to government.
“This money helps government to support the biggest investment in our railway since Victorian times.”
Mick Cash, the general secretary of the Rail, Maritime and Transport union, said the announcement was “another kick in the teeth for British passengers”, adding that travellers in the UK paid some of the highest fares in Europe “to travel on rammed out and unreliable trains”.
“Once again the rip-off private train companies are laughing all the way to the bank as they whack up fares and axe staff in all-out dash to maximise their profits,” Cash said. “This culture of private greed on Britain’s railways has to stop and RMT will step up the fight for a publicly owned railway where services and safety are the priority, not corporate profits.”
Alongside the fares announcement, the government said that some of Southern rail’s long-suffering passengers in the south of England would be repaid the equivalent of a month’s travel.
More than 84,000 passengers will be compensated to recognise the huge number of delays, cancellations and disruption on the network in recent months. The chaos has partly been caused by strikes over changes to the role of conductors and high levels of staff sickness.
Season ticket holders will be able to claim a refund for the equivalent of a month’s travel. Passengers with an annual ticket will be able to claim the one-off payout against their 2016 ticket, and it can be paid directly into their bank account.
Customers claiming against quarterly, monthly or weekly tickets must have bought travel for at least 12 weeks between 24 April and 31 December to be eligible.
The government said GTR, the parent company of Southern, had the details of most season ticket holders and would be inviting them to log on to a website to claim compensation. The company will also be able to consider proof of purchase from people claiming a payout who have not previously registered.
The rail minister Paul Maynard said: “Getting Southern rail services back on track is a priority for the government and I know that what passengers want most is a reliable service. But when things do go wrong it is right that we compensate people who have not had the service that they deserve. This is a gesture in recognition of the problems people have faced.
“We’re working hard to get Network Rail and Southern to improve this network and get this railway working the way people expect. We are investing record amounts in improving our railways and we need everyone in the rail industry, including the unions, to work together to deliver for passengers.”
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
After many years working for the same large company in a technical capacity on a small team, the management has finally formalised my job spec and advertised the role. I applied for it along with a more junior colleague.
Although I have vast experience and I have been doing this job for nearly 30 years, the post was given to my colleague. There are lots of possible reasons – he is cheaper, toes the line (unlike me), interviewed better. (No surprise, as this was my first interview for 30 years!)
I get on very well with my colleague and do not grudge him the job one bit, but I am in a dilemma. He regularly comes to me for help and advice as he does not have my technical experience. How do I proceed now he has been promoted above me? Do I say “sorry but I can no longer offer the help I have in the past”, or do I continue to help him and simply lump the fact that he is getting remuneration off my back?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
You could simply sit and imagine the singin’ in the wire. You could also try to persuade the planners to let you upgrade it into a minute home, office or, with that large window, an artist’s studio. If only you could reverse the estate agent’s charges. Guide price: £25,000. Finest Properties , 01430 843013
The Australian pioneer of the polymer bank note says it’s “stupid” that vegetarian and vegans are protesting in the UK about the five pound polymer note containing animal fat.
Professor David Solomon says the polymer notes contain trivial amounts of tallow, an animal fat found in candles and soap, yet pressure is being placed on the Bank of England to find an alternative.
“It’s stupid. It’s absolutely stupid,” Solomon told the Australian radio station 2GB. “There’s trivial amounts of it in there.”
More than 120,000 people have supported an online petition urging the Bank of England to cease using animal fat in the production of five pound notes – the first polymer notes in circulation in the UK.
“The new STG5 notes contain animal fat in the form of tallow. This is unacceptable to millions of vegans, vegetarians, Hindus, Sikhs, Jains and others in the UK,” the petition states.
“We demand that you cease to use animal products in the production of currency that we have to use.”
Solomon said polymer notes were extremely hard to forge and had a lot more benefits for the consumer than previous paper notes.
“It picks up less drugs than paper notes and you don’t chop down trees,” he said. “It’s more hygenic than a paper note by a long way.”
The $10 note was the first polymer bank note in circulation in Australia in 1988.
The note was developed by the country’s research and development body, CSIRO, led by a team under Solomon.
Buy to let landlords are scrambling to avoid the impact of tax changes that come into effect next year, a report has found.
The Buy to Let Britain report found landlords were restructuring their portfolios to escape higher taxes on their rental income, which will be phased in from April 2017. Some landlords have set up limited companies, it said, while others have increased rents or transferred properties to family members.
The report, compiled by mortgage lender Kent Reliance, also found that the average rent in Great Britain has hit a record high of £881 a month, and landlords indicated they intended to raise prices by an average of 5.4% – the equivalent of £571 a year for households.
It also revealed strong house price growth has pushed the value of rented accommodation in the UK to £1.3tn, up by 16% in the last year to September. 
The buy-to-let tax changes, which were unsuccessfully opposed in court by landlords represented by Cherie Booth, were introduced in the 2015 budget to level the playing field for owner-occupiers and investors. At the time the then chancellor George Osborne said buy-to-let landlords had a “huge advantage” over homebuyers. “And the better off the landlord, the more tax relief they get,” he added.
Currently, landlords can offset their entire mortgage interest costs against the rent they get from a property before they declare an income, but over the next four years that will be changed so that by 2021 just 20% of the interest will be subject to tax relief.
Kent Reliance said an increasing number of landlords were holding their properties in limited companies, which are not subject to the same taxes. In the first nine months of this year, 100,000 limited company loans were taken out by landlords buying properties, it said – double the number for all of 2015. In March, as purchases soared ahead of a new higher rate of stamp duty on second homes, 20,500 of the loans were taken out.
The lender said demand for this type of arrangement was likely to grow “as the tax changes bite”, and could account for two-thirds of buy-to-let loans in 2017. A survey of 900 landlords found that 11% had already incorporated, or had moved holdings to a lower-rate tax-paying spouse or partner. A further 25% were considering making one of those changes.
The bad news for tenants is that landlords are also considering raising rents to make up for lost income. A third of those questioned said they expected to hike rents in the next six months, with two-thirds of them blaming the tax change.
Andy Golding, chief executive of OneSavings Bank, which owns Kent Reliance, said: “The stamp duty levy clearly took its toll on the market, and combined with the forthcoming tax changes, landlords have felt at the mercy of a political agenda. But confidence is returning as landlords take action to limit the damage to their finances. The use of limited companies is soaring, and rents are increasing, even after one of the biggest surges in rental supply in recent history.”
Golding said the measures, which were designed to help aspiring owner-occupiers, would achieve the opposite. “We have warned all along that the tax changes will push up rents, and this is already starting to happen,” he said. “Only through a substantive and long-term building programme across all tenures will we see an end to escalating house prices and rents.”
David Hollingworth of mortgage broker London & Country said there were advantages to using a limited company to buy property, but landlords should consider the implications. “You cannot just transfer a property into a company – you have to sell it to the company and that could trigger other costs,” he said. “While corporation tax is low, you do have to think about things like how you will get your income out of the company.”
Hollingworth said the structure was unlikely to help anyone with just one or two buy-to-let properties.
The Residential Landlords Association (RLA) said its research had found that 40% of landlords had considered switching to limited company status, but that four in five had decided it was unsuitable.
Andrew Goodacre, RLA chief executive, said such a move was positive for new properties only.
He said: “Ultimately though, we need to encourage landlords to develop new properties whatever status. That is why the RLA believes the mortgage interest changes should apply only to new borrowing and that the stamp duty levy should not apply where a landlord invests in property that adds to the net supply of housing.”
Also, ‘simpler’ train fares planned; an innocent man handcuffed in Waitrose; and what next for GB energy customers
Many football clubs in the UK have liability insurance that covers them for claims from victims of child sex abuse, which has resulted in payouts. As the scandal continues to engulf the sport, insurers have pledged to improve the compensation process.
Police reported on Thursday that 350 people have now come forward to report attacks and, as the scope of inquiries grows, the role of insurance companies has come under the spotlight.
The Association of British Insurers (ABI) said: “Recent revelations regarding abuse in football are very distressing and at the heart of it are the victims and survivors who have been abused.
“The insurance industry is fully engaged with the current independent inquiry and has submitted constructive suggestions about how the civil justice compensation process could be improved.”
Patrick Collinson, the editor of Guardian Money, notes that major clubs take out combined employers’ and public liability policies, which collectively covers a huge range of eventualities, including allegations of sexual assault.
He says: “The public liability part covers the club for claims when, say, a fan is hurt in the stadium. The employers’ element covers claims relating to members of staff. One major insurer said there were circumstances, such as the allegations of sexual assault, in which claims could possibly be made against the employer’s liability, and a payment be made, and such a payment could be subject to a non-disclosure agreement.”
On Wednesday it emerged that Chelsea sanctioned a compensation payment at boardroom level to a former youth team player who approached the club to complain about abuse at the hands of the club’s former chief scout, Eddie Heath, who worked at the club between 1968 and 1979. Heath died in the late 1980s. The compensation was offered without an acceptance of liability.
Collinson added: “Legally speaking, any employer, such as a football club, can be held liable for personal injuries inflicted by a member of their staff, where the employee’s actions have been carried out during the course of their employment.
“Ultimately, if the employer is held to be liable, then the victim can make a personal injury claim which will then be covered by the club’s employer’s liability insurance.”
The ABI statement continued: “Compensation paid by an organisation to a victim could be covered by liability insurance. As part of the settlement process, confidentiality clauses are sometimes requested by victims or the organisation insured. They are not part of the insurance contract and we are not aware of any insurers who currently request them.”
An 89-year-old has found a job after placing an advert in his local paper asking for part-time work to stop him “dying of boredom”. Joe Bartley, from Paignton, south Devon, is due to start work at a cafe in the town after the owners of the family-run business spotted his request.
“No matter what your age or your background, you deserve a chance,” said Cantina Bar and Kitchen’s co-owner Sarah Martin. “Most people have got something to offer and Joe is someone who is keen, who is putting himself out there. What is not to like about that?
“A lot of people who come here don’t just come for coffee, they come for a chat, so Joe is perfect.”
Bartley, who was a member of the 6th Airborne division and served in Palestine after the second world war, put an advert in the Herald Express twice last month. It read: “Senior citizen, 89, seeks employment in Paignton area. 20hrs+ per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. I have references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!”
He said he had been overwhelmed by the response to the advert, which he described as “not unusual, just an old guy looking for work”, adding: “The owner phoned me and said she was interested, and asked me to come in. So I arrived at the cafe and we’ve had a bit of a chat with the owner, and shook hands.”
Bartley said he was amused at the fact that the advert had made him something of a local celebrity, and said he was looking forward to earning his own money to enable him to pay rent. “I can’t believe it really, I feel great about it,” he said.
He said he had lived alone since his wife, Cassandra, died two years ago, and had been lonely. “When you live on your own there is no one to speak to. Since she died I’ve moved into a flat and it’s a big block. Once you walk into that flat it’s like solitary confinement,” he said.
His new hospitality role was not the only job offer he got after taking the initiative. Glenn Rodgers, an independent baker in Barnstable, north Devon, offered the pensioner a job after reading his story in the Guardian. “I’m a baker and even though it’s not complicated, it’s therapeutic, it’s quite a soulful thing to do – and I thought I’d offer him a job.”
But the bakery, The Ginger Breadman, being in Barnstaple, was too far for Bartley to travel. Rodgers said he wanted the pensioner to know he had been offered a job in the hope that it would put a “smile on his face”. More employers should think about taking on older staff, he added. “It’s unjust otherwise. Why not give him a chance? Also it works both ways, employers are getting experienced reliable staff who really want to work.”
Bartley will get a lift to work with his new employer on Sunday, but will take a bus the rest of the week. “He is delighted, and we are looking forward to it,” said Martin. “We think about these things all the time. We are never going to be rich, but we like to give something back, so when we saw the advert there was no question – the minute we saw it we knew we’d give him a job.”
The media regulator is to investigate why telephone landline prices have risen so fast amid concerns that the elderly and vulnerable are being adversely affected by price hikes.
All major landline providers had increased line-rental charges by between 28% and 41% in recent years, in spite of the wholesale cost of providing those landlines falling by 25%, said Ofcom.
Market leaders BT and Virgin Media had the highest line-rental charges, with TalkTalk and Sky not far behind, Ofcom said. The price increases were felt most acutely by customers with a standalone landline service – those who do not have broadband or a pay-TV deal.
Last year, the Guardian highlighted the steep rise in landline charges in recent years that has massively outstripped inflation. UK consumers were found to be paying about 50% more for landlines than counterparts in Europe.
The telecoms firms have increased landline prices – BT’s is now £18.99/month – in part to offset declining revenues elsewhere. Telecoms customers now make far fewer voice calls on their landline as they rely on their mobiles or social media. However, they generally need a landline at home if they want to access fixed-line broadband.
Ofcom’s competition group director, Jonathan Oxley, said: “Our evidence shows that landline providers have been raising the price of line rental, even as their costs have been coming down.
“We’re particularly concerned for older and vulnerable customers, who rely on their landline and are less likely to change provider. So we’re reviewing this market to ensure these customers are protected and getting value for money,” he said.
Ofcom found that elderly and vulnerable people, who make up a significant proportion of standalone landline customers in the UK, were particularly affected by price rises.
The government’s digital minister, Matt Hancock, has welcomed the investigation. “Landlines are an essential service for thousands of households across the country, but especially for elderly and vulnerable people who are more reliant on their home phones. The government is clear that action should be taken where consumers are not getting a good deal, which is why we are launching a green paper next year to examine markets that are not working fairly,” he said.
A spokesperson for BT said: “We already offer a number of products that represent significant savings on standard line rental. For example, our home phone saver product, and for vulnerable customers our BT Basic service, which costs just £5.10 per month. We will engage fully in the industry consultation.”
Virgin Media said it was launching a new “Talk Protected” plan, which freezes line rental at £17.99/month for its older and disabled customers who rely on their landline the most.
A firm that sells Christmas cards based on pupils’ artwork to raise funds for schools has gone out of business in the busiest period of the year.
Schoolcardshop sold personalised cards and gifts through schools to pupils’ families and others. A message on its website said its Edinburgh-based parent company, Dynamic Colour, was no longer trading.
In an email to customers, seen by BBC Scotland, the Schoolcardshop team said it would not be able to produce this year’s products as Dynamic Colour was in the process of appointing a liquidator.
The BBC reported that the email said: “This has come as a shock to all of us and we’ve been trying hard to bring operations to a clean conclusion. Unfortunately, due to the situation we find ourselves in we are unable to continue in any form.”
It added: “We are sorry that all participating children and parents will not now receive their cards and gifts, but the matter is completely out of our control.”
Schoolcardshop’s website says it has been providing schools with “extremely high-quality printed products to help with their fundraising initiatives” for nearly 10 years. It allowed families to create and personalise cards, while schools retained a proportion of the money spent by families on the products.
Other products printed by the company included drawing books, gift labels, mugs and T-shirts.
The brief update on the Schoolcardshop website stated: “Please note that Dynamic Colour (Schoolcardshop’s parent company) is no longer trading. Further details will be available here in due course.”
No one was available to comment at Dynamic Colour.
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
Government promises to stamp out abuses of new-build ground rent
Plans for ‘simpler, more modern’ UK train fare system to be announced
Handcuffed in Waitrose: the innocent man in search of justice
GWR fails to deliver on the final cost of online special offer rail tickets
Calling John Lewis about my Partnership card ... is there anybody out there?
Parcel Monkey delivers customs duty bill to Filipino children instead of gift
Budget utility provider GB energy has folded. Miles Brignall looks at what happens next for gas and electricity customers.
Get competitive exchange rates and free online currency transfers from moneycorp, providers of the Guardian money transfer service, provided by Moneycorp.
Save time and money with the Guardian’s annual travel insurance, provided by Voyager.
A quarter of London homes listed on Airbnb were rented for more than 90 days last year, many illegally and in breach of an act intended to stop landlords turning badly needed housing into unofficial hotels. The booming homesharing website admitted on Thursday that 4,938 of its “entire home” London listings – 23% of the total – were let out for for three months or more, despite a law requiring anyone doing so to apply for planning permission.
The San Francisco-based website published an independent report into its activities by the thinktank IPPR that concluded: “It is likely there are many cases where planning permission for a change of use has not been obtained.”
The report warned that Airbnb and other homesharing sites are causing landlords to remove properties from the already stretched private rented sector and placing them into short-term lets in a trend that poses “potential future risks to housing supply in London”.
Airbnb announced on Thursday that from next spring it will ban hosts in London from renting out entire homes for more than 90 days a year without official consent.
“The problem was that a website that was about people making a little money letting out rooms was being abused by professional landlords turning their properties into hotels by the back door,” said Tom Copley, Labour’s housing spokesman on the London assembly, who campaigned for the change.
He said it adversely impacted on the already squeezed housing supply in the capital and affected local communities, with people in some areas complaining of Airbnb guests coming and going at all times.
It was already against the law for property owners to let out their homes on short term, hotel-style lets without planning permission, if the total letting period was over 90 days per year. But, according to Copley, town halls did not have the resources or data to enforce it.
Sarah Hayward, leader of the London Borough of Camden, welcomed the ban. “Swathes of properties in Camden had effectively been removed from the longer-term rental market, making it both more expensive and difficult to find a longer-term rental property in the borough for those working here,” she said. “It was abundantly clear to all councils involved that many users of the site were flouting the 90-night limit, and the simplest way to stop that was for Airbnb to stop it at source.”
In a letter to hosts sent on Thursday, Airbnb said: “We want to help ensure that home-sharing grows responsibly and sustainably, and makes London’s communities stronger. That is why we are introducing a change to our platform that will create new and automated limits to help ensure that entire home listings in London are not shared for more than 90 days a year, unless hosts confirm that they have permission to share their space more frequently.
“The new measures will begin from 2017. If you want to host more often, you will need to certify that you have permission to do so or apply for the relevant permissions from your local council.”
In March, Airbnb said London was the third biggest city in terms of places to stay, with a little over 40,000 places, and that this was growing at a rate of 75% per year.
“I welcome this move,” Copley said. “Airbnb have engaged constructively since I raised this with the mayor a couple of months ago. I now call on other short-term letting websites to do the same.”
Airbnb, which has been valued at $25bn (£20bn) and helps let out 3m properties around the world, has faced a regulatory backlash in some cities where leaders have grown concerned about its impact on housing supply.
Berlin levies a €100,000 (£85,000) fine for anyone renting out more than half of their home for less than two months without a permit, while hosts in San Francisco who do not register with the city authorities can be fined up to $1,000 per day. In New York there are strict laws against short lets in apartment blocks if hosts are not staying the apartments at the same time as their Airbnb guests.
“While independent research shows that home-sharing has no significant impact on housing affordability in London, we believe it’s important to take action against unwelcome commercial operators who have no place on our platform,” Airbnb told hosts.
British Gas has become the second leading energy supplier to freeze its standard prices this winter.
The company, the UK’s biggest energy firm, said the move would bring some peace of mind to more than 6 million customers. But consumer organisations said energy companies needed to do more than just freeze prices and warned that price rises of up to 10% were likely after the end of the winter.
Two weeks ago SSE, one of Britain’s “big six” energy suppliers, froze its standard tariffs, putting pressure on rivals to follow suit. Wholesale gas and electricity prices have risen sharply since June, prompting some smaller energy firms to raise their prices. Many bigger companies have already bought gas and electricity for delivery during the winter at lower prices.
In a Christmas message, British Gas said it was keeping the price of its standard variable energy tariff unchanged through this winter. A spokeswoman said prices had been frozen until at least the end of March. The company has also launched a deal that allows households to fix their energy prices for three winters, until March 2019.
Its standard variable energy tariff paid by direct debit is £1,044 – £40 more than its cheapest deal, a one-year fix at £1,004.
Consumer organisations gave a guarded response. Citizens Advice welcomed the winter price freezes from British Gas and SEE, and called on other big energy firms to follow suit.
Joe Malinowski, of TheEnergyShop.com, said: “That’s not a big deal, it’s only a few months. It’s a nice gesture but, call me cynical, the already expensive standard tariffs are going to stay expensive for this winter.”
Gillian Guy, the chief executive of Citizens Advice, agreed, saying: “Energy customers on the standard tariff are already paying a premium – their bills are as much as £380 more than for those on cheaper fixed deals.”
Martin Lewis, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, said the huge increase in wholesale prices and the weaker pound would soon enough affect household bills. “Come the end of winter, expect to see hikes of up to 10% by many of the big six companies,” he added.
Consumer organisations urged energy companies and the government to take further action. Guy said: “It’s also important that the government looks at a more permanent way to bring down costs for people on the standard tariff. One way to do this would be to automatically switch low-income customers who have been on the standard tariff for years to a cheaper deal.”
The chief executive of British Gas, Mark Hodges, sought to address concerns by making a “commitment that all British Gas customers will always get access to our best deals”. He promised an annual health check for customers on the standard rate to ensure they are on the right tariff.
There has been mounting criticism from politicians about the treatment of loyal customers by the large energy firms. When the business secretary, Greg Clark, met representatives from the industry earlier this month, he vowed to take action to ensure it treats customers properly.
A recent report commissioned by industry lobby group Energy UK showed it cost the big six energy companies £844 to provide dual fuel this year. But the average household bill was more than £1,000, according to campaign group BigDeal.com.
Theresa May used her Conservative party conference speech in October to criticise the high number of customers on standard contracts, saying: “It’s just not right that two-thirds of energy customers are stuck on the most expensive tariffs.”
Alex Neill, the managing director of home and legal services at consumer group Which?, said: “While it’s welcome that another big energy supplier is freezing its standard tariff prices, these are generally the most expensive deals on the market and customers should look to see if they can switch to a better deal.”
Petrol prices in Britain are set to rise after the Saudi-led Opec cartel agreed its first production cut in eight years, sending the price of oil surging.
This could push up petrol prices by as much as 9p a litre, adding almost £5 to the cost of filling up an average family car, according to motoring organisations. Higher oil prices could also push up household energy bills as wholesale gas prices tend to track the price of crude.
Opec, whose 14 members pump a third of the world’s oil, announced at a meeting in Vienna on Wednesday that it would trim production by 1.2m barrels a day to 32.5m from 1 January. Russia, the largest non-Opec producer, has also agreed to reduce its output gradually.
The news sent Brent crude, the global benchmark, 8% higher to more than $50 a barrel. Brent rose a further 0.6% to $52.42 a barrel on Thursday, trading around a six-week high, while New York crude climbed over $50 a barrel for the first time since the end of October.
The AA estimates that a rise in crude oil prices to $60 a barrel would push petrol prices including VAT up 9p a litre to about 123p a litre. That is £4.95 extra a tank and £18 extra a month for a family with two petrol cars – just as winter sets in and cars use more fuel to power heaters and lights.
Luke Bosdet, a spokesman for the AA, said: “Not only is this the fourth jump to $50 a barrel so far this year, but it also comes at the wrong time. With winter motoring cars consume more fuel.”
Changes in oil prices feed through to petrol prices after 10 to 14 days. Bosdet deplored that oil prices were driven more by “feverish speculation” than actual changes to production. He added: “The only silver lining is that oil hasn’t taken off massively.”
RAC fuel spokesman Simon Williams said oil prices would rise further in coming days and weeks, “likely pushing pump prices up in the short term, but it is what happens into 2017 that will be most important in determining if the days of relatively low prices of fuel that drivers have benefited from this year are coming to an end”.
Petrol prices dropped sharply in early 2016 to about 100p a litre when oil plummeted to below $27 a barrel, amid an oil glut. Iran ramped up production after international sanctions on the country were lifted.
At present, fuel prices average 114.16p for unleaded and 116.36p for diesel, according to website PetrolPrices.com.
Williams noted that the sterling-dollar exchange rate was also crucial – as oil is traded in dollars a weaker pound can push prices in the UK up, as has happened since the Brexit vote in late June.
Annual house price growth has slowed to the lowest rate in 10 months, according to an index.
Property values increased by 4.4% year on year in November, the weakest annual growth since January when there was also a 4.4% increase, figures from Nationwide Building Society showed.
House prices edged up by 0.1% month on month in November, following a 0% change in October, taking the average property value across the UK to £204,947.
Despite the slowdown, Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said the latest increase is in line with growth rates seen since early 2015. In October, an annual increase of 4.6% was recorded.
Gardner said: “There are some signs that, despite the uncertain economic outlook, demand conditions have strengthened a little in recent months, reflecting the impact of solid labour market conditions and historically low borrowing costs. Mortgage approvals increased in October, and surveyors report that new buyer inquiries have increased modestly.
“The relatively low number of homes on the market and modest rates of housing construction are likely to keep the demand/supply balance fairly tight in the quarters ahead, even if economic conditions weaken, as most forecasters expect.”
Gardner pointed to data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders showing the popularity of fixed mortgage rates as borrowers lock into ultra-low-rate deals.
He said: “Data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders suggests that over 90% of new mortgages were contracted on fixed rates over the past 12 months. This may be driven by a desire to lock in record low interest rates.
“The proportion of new mortgage lending contracted on fixed rates has increased considerably since the low point in 2010, when less than half of lending was on fixed rates. In recent years, the proportion of lending accounted for by fixed-rate deals has persisted at levels well above those prevailing before the financial crisis.
“Fixed-rate deals are most popular amongst first-time buyers for whom certainty over monthly payments is likely to be particularly important. Indeed, over the past 12 months 95% of new mortgage lending to first-time buyers was on fixed rates.”
Gardner said the average rates on fixed-rate deals have edged down in recent years, adding: “For borrowers with a 10% deposit, two-year fixed rates are currently the lowest on record, at 2.42%.”
Jeremy Leaf, a north London estate agent and a former residential chairman of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics), said the housing market tends to slow down in the run-up to Christmas.
He said the figures “reflect the struggle between those trying to take advantage of very low interest rates and softening house prices versus those showing caution in view of the economic and political uncertainty. The result is modest house price increases mainly because of the continuing shortage of supply”.
Howard Archer, chief UK and European economist at IHS Global Insight, said: “House prices look likely to rise modestly in the near term.
“However, we suspect that house prices will come under increasing pressure as 2017 progresses and may edge down over the year, possibly by around 2%.”
Archer said a lack of homes on the market would help to keep prices up.
Q I’ve recently turned 20 years old and I’ve taken a year out from my degree course to get some industry experience, and I’ve also been saving up. I haven’t got enough to invest in an amazing property, but I do think my savings will go some way in helping me get my foot on the ladder.
I’ve always wanted to get into property development as something which I would do on top of the job I hope to have after I graduate.
I’d quite like to start right now but I’m not sure how likely I am to get a mortgage at my age and as a student. I don’t know whether I should wait until I’ve graduated and got a well-paying job.
I’ve had a look at some properties and I think I’ve found a few that look promising. I’d probably go for a buy-to-let so I have a constant income – but how much of this do I actually get after tax?
Do I have to have some sort of experience as a landlord before I’m likely to be lent money? How would I go about getting a mortgage: are there different types? I’ve tried researching this but I still don’t know if I’m deemed as ‘too young’ to start in the property market. HK
A The building opposite me is owned by a landlord who used his student loan to put down the deposit on the first of his now multiple buy-to-let properties. That was about 10 years ago, when lending rules were less strict but, in theory, a student is as eligible to take out a buy-to-let mortgage as anyone else. Nor is age a barrier (unless you’re in your 70s or 80s) as most buy-to-let mortgages are available to 18-year-olds.
You choice may be more limited than that of other buyers. Some lenders won’t accept applications from people aged under 21 or 25. The fact that you don’t already have a mortgage on another property is also a bit of a no-no for some but there are around 20 lenders (out of the 76 listed by Moneyfacts) who will look at applications from first-time buy-to-let buyers.
Whether any application is successful will depend on whether the figures add up. The first stumbling block is the size of the deposit you are able to put down on a property. Unless it is at least 25% of the lender’s valuation of the property, it won’t be impossible to get a buy-to-let mortgage but your choice of lenders will be limited to two. For those two, you’ll need a deposit of 20%.
Then there’s the question of rental income. While a handful of lenders look at both earned and rental income, the majority base their lending decision on rental income only. The catch is that most lenders expect the rental income you get from the property to cover the monthly mortgage repayments by 125%. So, if your mortgage costs £1,000 a month, the monthly rent will have to be £1,250. However, new lending rules and tax changes due to come into force from 2017 will push up this “rental coverage” rate to 145%.
Even if you managed to get a mortgage, buy a property and find a tenant, how much money you make from your investment depends on all your other costs. To answer your specific question, what you actually get is whatever your tenant(s) pay you. But you’ll have to use that money to pay the mortgage, fund the various insurances you need to buy and pay for the necessary safety tests, as well as the cost of any maintenance work at the property. You will also have to pay tax on your rental income.
At the moment, you can deduct the costs mentioned from the rental income before arriving at the amount that is taxable. So, if you receive £15,000 a year (£1,250 a month) but spend, say, £12,000 on mortgage interest and £1,000 on other stuff connected to the property, you would pay tax on only £2,000. However, from April 2017, a new system is being phased in which, by 2021, will mean that you can deduct only 20% of the cost of mortgage interest. Using the same example as before, this would mean being taxed on £11,600 of the rental income rather than £2,000. This significant change to the taxation of rental income has caused the National Landlords Association to forecast that in 2017 around half a million buy-to-let flats will be put up for sale.
Of course, while you are a student and/or in the process of finding a post-graduate job – and so probably not earning enough to pay tax – you won’t have to worry about a tax bill, although you will still have to report your rental income to HM Revenue & Customs.
The supplier of the new plastic £5 notes has been forced into a rethink after vegan and vegetarian campaigners complained that animal fat was used during the note’s production process.
After coming in for criticism earlier this week over the use of the derivative, known as tallow, in the polymer note, the Bank of England said on Wednesday that it was “aware of some people’s concerns” and that it would treat them with the “utmost respect”.
The Bank said it was in talks with the supplier, Innovia, which was looking at “potential solutions”. In a statement released on Wednesday, it said: “This issue has only just come to light, and the Bank did not know about it when the contract was signed.
“Information recently provided by our supplier, Innovia, and its supply chain shows that an extremely small amount of tallow is used in an early stage of the production process of polymer pellets, which are then used to create the base substrate for the £5 note.
“Innovia is now working intensively with its supply chain and will keep the Bank informed on progress towards potential solutions.”
The note, the first from the Bank of England to be printed on polymer – though not the UK’s first – was introduced in September and is seen by many as heralding the beginning of the end for paper money.
There was fury among vegetarians and vegans following confirmation by the Bank that the notes contained tallow. 
Doug Maw, who started a petition against its use, said he was “disgusted” a more suitable alternative had not been sourced. The 47-year-old hotel worker from Keswick in Cumbria, said: “There is no excuse for it. There has got to be other ways of making money without using animal products.” 
More than 110,000 people have since signed the petition.
Manager demoted for failing to bow to Korean boss, UK tribunal told
Dave Ogilvy is, as he says, not your average 63-year-old. The UberX driver works up to 85 hours per week and has just about finished saving for his retirement, which will be spent snowboarding around the world with the woman he plans to make his third wife.
Ogilvy started driving for ride-sharing company 10 months ago after his sales career hit a wall. He had been operating as a “middle man”, providing goods for large retailers and then found himself without a business when his customers decided to negotiate directly with manufacturers.
“I couldn’t find the right thing to do. I had three years of a pretty bad financial situation,” he says.
A friend introduced him to the idea of driving for Uber, he rented a car through Splend (which hires cars and does hire-purchase deals for Uber drivers) and now he loves the freedom, the variety and the income of his new venture.
Ogilvy says he never felt discriminated against in the job market because of his age: “If I tell people I am 49, they believe me.”
Others in his age group are not so fortunate. It takes an average of 116 weeks for over 55s to re-enter the workforce and there are more people over 50 on work-for-the-dole schemes (despite the fact it is not a requirement for them) than there are unemployed people under 22.
While employers are making efforts to become more inclusive in their hiring practises, outside of the large financial institutions, mature-age workers still lack the kind of champions that benefit women in the workforce – as in the Male Champions of Change group set up by the former sex discrimination commissioner Elizabeth Broderick and the Workplace Gender Equality Agency.
While employers may publicise their efforts to retain the older workers they already have, rarely do we hear about over 55s being specifically targeted as new recruits.
Around 27% of people over the age of 50 report experiencing age discrimination at work, according to the Australian Human Rights Commission’s Willing to Work inquiry report, released in May 2016.
In the corporate world, there is cachet in being seen to be encouraging women in leadership and fighting racial and cultural discrimination, but advocating for mature-age workers is yet to find its place in the sun, says the managing partner of PwC’s People Business, Jon Williams.
“In the social debate, this is not a sexy thing to be seen to be doing,” he says. “They ought to be proud about it. It is not about hiring them as a last resort, it is about hiring them because they have qualities that other age groups don’t necessarily have – whether it’s experience or empathy or their willingness to let others succeed or their ability to look after themselves.”
Bias against older workers has a wide-ranging economic impact. PwC’s Golden Age Index reports that harnessing the power of that workforce could deliver Australia economic gains of up to $78bn.
The chief executive of Splend, Chris King, says Dave Ogilvy is a good example of the benefits of age and experience. “He has one of the highest Uber ratings across Australia, and his earnings are sensational,” says King.
And King has the metrics to prove it. Splend use telematics to rank its 900 drivers on their safely based on speed, acceleration, breaking and cornering.
“We find a lot of drivers are in their 60s, retired businessmen, and they don’t do it for the money. A lot of the time it is social interaction and just getting out of the house,” he says.
King says drivers in the over-50 age range get higher ratings from customers, are more patient and friendly, less stressed and safer on the roads. “The feedback we get from surveys and our staff, they are awesome,” he adds.
Williams says it also makes sense from a business point of view to have workplaces mirror the demographic of the populations they serve, especially since baby boomers (aged 52 to 70) have plenty of money to spend.
This is exactly what the Commonwealth Bank is doing in a six-month trial to hire more mature-age workers into the two call centres that deal with superannuation, investment and retirement products for Colonial First State.
The percentage of workers over 55 across the bank is 7.2%, compared with 16% of Australia’s total labour force.
When the trial period ends, the bank will assess its success in terms of customer satisfaction and employee retention. If the results are promising, the bank will then consider proactively hiring over 55s across other business areas.
Westpac was one of the first Australian organisations to focus on recruiting mature-age people, setting a target to increase the number of employees aged 50 and over to more than 20.5% by 2017. By early 2015 Westpac had reached 20.9%. The bank was also the first corporate to introduce grandparental leave.
Family-owned Bus Queensland is another company that goes out of its way to employ mature-age workers. Because a large proportion of its work is school bus runs, the company found it hard in the past to retain younger drivers who needed an income over school holiday periods.
The human resources manager for the company, John Muir, says the split shifts and plentiful holidays can suit older workers, and the company has managed to attract drivers with a wide range of experience.
The company employs 400 drivers and at least 60% are older than 50 and some are over 70. Muir says drivers have included engineers, accountants and even a retired judge who took on a minibus run for children with special needs.
“They make a decision they want to do something different in life and think: ‘I’ll go and drive a bus for a while’,” he says.
Bus Queensland is taking part in the Department of Employment’s Corporate Champions initiative, which is for employers who make a public commitment to hire mature-age workers. Here’s hoping more companies get on board.
Katie Allen poses three crucial questions on how to improve Britain’s productivity (The road to greater productivity is via pay and flexibility, 28 November). Namely how it links in with low pay, how it interacts with working hours, and what it tells us about the importance of staff taking ownership of their work.
I have put a proposal to the government that sets out to cover each of these points. I have proposed a network of public employment services, driven locally by Jobcentre Plus and sustained by City Deal funding, with the specific aim of helping low-paid workers to climb the earnings ladder and craft their jobs to match their skills and circumstances.
Its main benefit to workers would be the provision by a dedicated caseworker of information, advice and guidance, as part of a clear and agreed contract which is aimed at helping them earn more money and improve their working lives – be it through altering their hours, negotiating a pay increase, taking advantage of local childcare services or discounts on public transport, gaining specialist skills, or finding work elsewhere for which their circumstances are better suited.
The government’s own in-work service is currently being piloted among a limited group of universal credit claimants only. To help solve the productivity puzzle in which our country finds itself, a more comprehensive offer is required to help change the nature of low-paid work.
Frank Field MP
Labour, Birkenhead
• Philip Hammond says that in the real world a German worker takes four days to make what we make in five. This is a heavy burden to put on to a metric that is just one big number (GDP) divided by another (workers). It is like saying that people have on average 1.99 legs, ie technically true perhaps, but quite hard to find an example and not very helpful.
Given the same tools and the same task, I’m sure a British worker is just as productive as a German one. What brings our average productivity down is a higher proportion of people in low-paid work, and a long-term failure to invest in capital equipment. Proper sectoral analysis is required, not eye-catching headlines which just make us feel inadequate to the modern world.
Whether it is right to reward the worker for making more widgets by using a better machine is a different question – perhaps the return on capital should go to the business owner. But while you can always mothball an underperforming factory, at a national level you can’t just mothball a workforce. Even Henry Ford knew he needed paying customers to buy his cars.
Tim Grollman
London
• Productivity in the UK car industry matches or exceeds the best elsewhere in Europe. Productivity while selecting parcels in a warehouse would be much lower due to the large number of people employed on zero-hours contracts, which will still have to be taken into account when calculating productivity. Crudely average the two and you have a misleading view of the UK economy. Only by analysing the economy sector by sector will we identify where attention is needed, either by better training or legislation to outlaw poor employment practices. 
Richard Bull
Woodbridge, Suffolk
• Gaby Hinsliff is wrong (The golden generation should enjoy the luxury of being useful while it can, 25 November). Many retired people wonder how they ever had time for work. I recall that, over 30 years ago, predictions of a “leisured age” led to the view that society should prepare for a reduced working week. Recent articles (eg Just about managing? In these towns that’s a dream, Aditya Chakrabortty, 22 November) and diminishing opportunities for even skilled work suggest, in respect of work, the predictions were correct. Yet there is increased necessity for employment. Both partners in a family work to make ends meet, pension age is increasing, people resort to spurious “self-employment”, and graduates undertake unpaid internships. What went wrong?
The cause is concentration of the benefit from automation into the hands of the elite. Business heads’ rewards are disproportionate to their workforce.
Shared more equally, the need for full-time work should diminish. Equalisation in pay levels, coupled with redistributive taxes, could allow provision of a basic income sufficient to permit a shorter working week. The old-age pension could disappear. Anyone could continue working at occupations they enjoy, or which are their own rewards, but financial reward should not be the principal stimulus for any undertaking. Pay differentials and “capitalist” methods of earning could remain, but rewards would be appropriately taxed so that no one was forced into full-time employment. What creativity might be unleashed.
Utopian? Perhaps, but to avoid the conflict predicted by George Monbiot (Trump’s climate denial is just one of the forces that point us towards war, 23 November) we must reverse the present “survival of the richest” and reduce the need to work in order to live.
Ian King
Westbury-on-Severn, Gloucestershire
• In the 1970s there was considerable discussion about what society should do to cater for all the “leisure time” that would arise when repetitive processes were automated and made more efficient. However, in that age of the welfare state and fairer taxation it was assumed that the benefits of automation would be to a significant extent shared.
However, along came Thatcher and Reagan with authoritarian monetarist economics (which in an Orwellian misuse of language is now referred to as “liberal economics”), and in particular the tax race to the bottom so that, as technological advance means we have become much more efficient at producing the goods and food we need, the benefits have been retained by an ever decreasing minority, while the incomes of the majority have stagnated, or even regressed, for the last 40 years.
With an ever smaller workforce required to produce the products we need, unless we can reverse the trend back to redistributive taxation, and accept that not everyone can contribute directly to material wealth creation (but still want and need a good share of that wealth), I think George Monbiot’s prediction that we are heading towards major conflict is almost inevitable.
Graham Dean
Wellington, Somerset
• If there is going to be less employment in those areas where robots will replace manpower, can someone explain our governments’ arguments for more immigrants to do “the jobs we don’t want to do”. There is a contradiction here. If this doomsday theory is right, encouraging the arrival of immigrants from other parts of the world can only lead to a nightmare scenario of more people turning to extremist parties, social problems and social unrest when jobs and homes go.
Peter Fieldman
Paris, France
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Your report (28 November) tells us yet again that there is a gender pay gap issue, identifies sectors and areas with seemingly the biggest disparities, and reminds us that the problem is likely to take 60 years to sort out.
Whatever reports are produced, and whatever entreaties are made, the gender pay gap will never go away unless and until something is done to change matters. Well-researched, thought-through proposals have been put to employers and governments. Some good experiments have been conducted, notably the women-only training programmes between 2006 and 2010, which on a shoestring budget skilled and/or retrained more than 25,000 women across a variety of sectors. Schools should separate girls and boys for the Stem suite of subjects, allowing girls to study in the ways proven to be more suitable to them. Employers should introduce positive action programmes which would identify and bring forward women with the capacity and the desire to move on and up.
None of this costs a fortune, but it does require determination and the political will to see change now.
Margaret Prosser
Labour, House of Lords
• At the elite level of women’s football in England – the Women’s Super League – there are many players who would be happy with the equivalent of “$1,000 and $2,000 a month” (Low wages, threats, late payment – football’s non-elite underbelly, Sport, 29 November). Some of them almost play for free. Why? Partly the FA’s ludicrous funding model (a soft cap on spending of 40% of revenue) and partly the extent to which some teams linked to the men’s Premier League receive huge financial support. Small teams – for example, newly promoted Yeovil and Bristol Academy – receive little funding.
John Bird
Bristol
• Your article (Pay squeeze will be the longest in 70 years, 25 November) says how workers have seen a decade without real earning growth. It does not mention the non-workers who are still doing very well for themselves: MPs up 1.3% in 2016 after the 10% increase in 2015; high court judges up 12%-15%; top executive pay up by 10%. We need to be kept aware of the widening pay gap to legitimately direct our anger away from the Jams (“just about managing”) and the scroungers towards the MQNTYs (“managing quite nicely, thank you”), who maintain their power while increasing their income.
Anne Strachan
Manchester
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
When is a snowflake not a snowflake? Answer: when it has fourfold symmetry, like the graphic used with your article (Poor little snowflake, G2, 29 October). How could you make such a mistake? If you are determined to include a snowflake graphic, please get it right. Your snowflakes appear to be made of cubic ice, a metastable polymorph not seen in blizzards or snowballs. An interesting idea but sadly a fantasy. Regular bog-standard ice comprises a hexagonal array of water molecules, so snowflakes likewise have sixfold symmetry. You silly snowflakes!
Roger Davey
Chester
• Young people’s need for “safe spaces” is completely understandable. I’m quite old now but still need mine: it’s my bedroom, usually with a favourite book and a cat. But speakers’ platforms and debating chambers are intended as verbal battlegrounds and have no business being anybody’s safe space.
Jan Chamier 
London
• Here’s a revolutionary idea from Jeremy Hunt (Apprentice nurses without degrees to learn job on wards, 30 November). Roll back 50 years and that’s what student nurses were doing, I was one of them. It would be interesting to know if patients’ mortality rate improved when this practice was replaced by insisting nurses get a degree first.
Sarah Akhtar
Stoke-on-Trent
• The Brexit aide’s notes mention having cake, eating it and “French likely to be most difficult” (Caught on camera, G2, 30 November). Understandable really, they’ve got history with cake.
Terri Green
Langley, Warwickshire
• I was encouraged to read that scientists reported that playing tennis can result in a 47% reduced risk of death (Report, 30 November). I had always worried that it was 100% – new balls please!
Murray Marshall
Salisbury
• Apparently the new fivers are 20% pony and 1% monkey (Petition calls for end to animal fat in plastic £5, 30 November).
Alasdair McKee
Lancaster
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
A financial manager at a UK branch of a Korean firm lost her job because she refused to bow to her boss, an employment tribunal has heard.
Misook McDonald, 43, claims she was demoted to secretarial duties after the perceived slight and is suing Dongbu Daewoo Electronics for sex discrimination, age discrimination and racial discrimination.
The tribunal in Reading, Berkshire, heard that she was moved after the chief financial director angrily confronted her over her failure to bow to him at the start and end of each working day.
She said that when she challenged Ho Seung Yoo about having to make the coffee in her new job, he replied: “Isn’t that what female workers should do?”
McDonald, who has an English father and South Korean mother, claims she was stripped of her managerial role because she was not a white British man.
The electronic sales company, which has a base in Winnersh Triangle, Berkshire, and Ho deny the claims.
McDonald returned to work as a part-time assistant finance manager in April 2014 after a career break to have two children.
She was promoted to finance manager and head of human resources, reporting directly to Ho, despite having no experience in HR, and began working full-time in February last year.
She claimed that as the only bilingual Korean and English speaker in the company, she had been highly valued, but when “a better-speaking Korean employee came along, I was not his preferred choice. I am also not considered ‘pure’ as my father is English.
“I expressed that I felt discriminated just because I am viewed as a Korean female and younger, hence lower in status that I can be looked down upon and pushed aside,” she said.
McDonald was signed off work with stress and told the company’s managing director, Choong Sik Park, in August that she was being harassed by Ho.
“He said Mr Yoo was very angry that I had broken protocol by not bowing to him every morning when I get to work and I do not bow to him when I leave the office at night,” she said.
Ho denied he had demanded McDonald bow to him, but when asked about the coffee comments he replied: “Yes I did say it. However, although I asked her to make some coffee for my guests, I was really sorry for asking that of her at the time.”
Did you sleep well last night? If you didn’t, are you aware of the consequences? Sure, you feel a bit foggy-brained, but there’s more to it than that. According to research by the thinktank Rand Europe, sleep deprivation costs the UK economy £40bn a year. In the US, the estimated cost of poor sleep is US$411bn.
But how can lack of sleep be quantified? “We built an economic model that simulates the real economies of those countries,” says Marco Hafner, the Rand report’s lead author. “Then we looked at three effects. One is mortality, because people who regularly sleep fewer than six hours a day have a 13% greater chance of dying at any point. That has a negative effect on the economy, because those people are then not in the workplace,” he says. Hang on, don’t they just get replaced? “Yes, but that can be costly, because new people are not as effective.”
Hafner got the idea for the research after he became a father. He realised he was driving to work, but not really understanding how he got there; sitting in the office, but not really functioning. Somewhere in that brain fog (and this raises a counter-question about the effect of sleeplessness on creativity), he thought: “Why has no one thought about how we can measure sleep?” The semi-functioning state he describes accounts for the biggest cost of sleeplessness: productivity. The third and final cost is the negative impact on lifetime earnings of young people who lack sleep.
So, what can be done to help workers sleep better? Some companies already offer nap rooms or nap pods – such as the Huffington Post, Uber, Google, Ben & Jerry’s and PricewaterhouseCoopers – but they are a long way from commonplace and beyond the means of most employers. Other aides to alertness include canteen menus that offer healthy food and regulating the temperature of the office, a topic explored in a Cornell University study of the effect of temperature on productivity.
Office design is increasingly blurring the lines between work and leisure. The proliferation of table tennis tables, foosball tables, massage chairs, indoor mini-golf courses, pot plants and kitchen and lounge areas suggests that employers want to make the workplace so comfortable, so much like home, that people almost forget to leave. All of this is designed to increase productivity, of course. But if increased productivity relies upon longer working hours, which lead to less sleep, which itself generates an economic cost, who is to say which cost or benefit is greater?
“We spend lots of time on our smartphones; that exposes you to a lot of blue light, which is bad for your levels of melatonin,” Hafner says. He suggests a curfew after which employees are not expected to respond to emails.
“Sleep is a public-health issue,” he says. “Make sleep like smoking. There are smoking cessation programs. But not many companies care about sleep in that way.”
After all, we spend about a third of our lives sleeping or trying to sleep. It would be nice to excel at it.
Younger generations are being told to prepare to wait even longer for their pensions, with former minister Steve Webb suggesting that the retirement age for a state pension will rise to 70.
I can understand why some policymakers seeking to cut the costs of state support for pensioners are attracted to the idea of continually raising pension ages, but I believe this is potentially damaging to certain social groups.
The justification for such an increase is based on forecasts of rising average life expectancy. But just using average life expectancy as a yardstick ignores significant differences in longevity across British society. For example, people living in less affluent areas, or who had lower paid or more physically demanding careers, or started work straight from school, have a higher probability of dying younger. Continually increasing state pension ages, and making such workers wait longer for pension payments to start, prolongs significant social disadvantage.
The state pension qualification criteria depend on national insurance contributions. Normally, workers and their employers make contributions that can amount to around 25% of their earnings. Even now, a significant minority of the population does not live to state pension age, or dies very soon thereafter, despite having paid significant sums into the system. By raising the state pension age, based on rising average life expectancy, this social inequality is compounded.
Increasing the state pension age is a blunt instrument. A stark cutoff fails to recognise the needs of millions of people who will be physically unable to keep working to the age of 70, because of particular circumstances in their working life, their current health, or environmental and social factors that negatively impact on specific regions of the country.
State pension unfairness is even greater, because those who are healthy and wealthy enough can already get much larger state pensions than others who cannot afford to wait. If you can delay starting your state pension until 70 – assuming you either have a good private income or are able to keep working – the new state pension will pay over £200 a week. But if you are very ill, caring for relatives, or for whatever reason cannot keep working up to state pension age (now 65 for men and between 63 and 64 for women) you get nothing at all.
In fact, just reforming state pensions is not the best way to cope with an ageing population. It is important to rethink retirement too. Those who can and want to work longer could boost their own lifetime incomes and future pensions, and also the spending power of the economy and national output, if more were done to facilitate and encourage later life working. Having more older workers in the economy, especially given the demographics of the western world, is a win-win for all of us. Even a few years of part-time work, before full-time retirement, can benefit individuals and the economy. But this should not be achieved by forcing everyone to wait longer for a state pension and ignoring the needs of those groups who cannot do so.
There is no provision, for example, for an ill-health early state pension, or for people to start state pensions sooner at a reduced rate. Politicians have entirely ducked this question but such a system would acknowledge the differences across society. There are, surely, more creative and equitable ways of managing state pension costs for an increasingly ageing population, using parameters other than just the starting age.
Indeed, raising state pension ages has already caused huge hardship to many women born in the 1950s. These women believed their state pension would start at 60, but many discovered only recently they will need to wait until 66. Many women have no other later life income, therefore they are totally dependent on their state pension.
Rather than just considering increasing the pension age, the government could consider having a range of ages, instead of one stark chronological cutoff. Allowing people an early-access pension, possibly reflecting a longer working life or poorer health, could alleviate some of the unfairness inherent in the current system. Increasing the number of years required to qualify for full pensions could also help.
Raising the state pension age is rather a crude measure for managing old-age support in the 21st century.
Women dominate the upper reaches of Forbes magazine’s list of the highest-paid musicians of 2016. Four of the top five places are occupied by women, with Taylor Swift topping the list. Between June 2015 and June 2016, the magazine estimates she earned $170m, largely from her 1989 world tour.
She earned $60m more than second-placed One Direction, who were followed by Adele, Madonna and Rihanna.
What’s noticeable is how many of the biggest acts generated the bulk of their revenue from live performance. Garth Brooks, in sixth place, began his first tour in 13 years in September 2014, and has been on the road ever since, plating multiple arena shows in scores of US cities, and sometimes playing two shows per night, and taking only Christmas and August off. His tour is scheduled to continue until February 2017.
AC/DC, in seventh place, completed their Rock or Bust world tour earlier this year, and despite a number of fans demanding – and getting – refunds when singer Brian Johnson had to pull out, still earned $67.5m. The presence of Axl Rose as Johnson’s replacement doubtless helped sell some of those returned tickets.
Adele is unusual in the list, in that the bulk of her earnings came from recorded music. Her most recent album 25, released in November 2015, broke sales records on both sides of the Atlantic, and was the bestselling album of 2015.
Ninth-place Calvin Harris combined popularity as a recording and touring artist with the colossal fees he earns as a resident DJ at the Las Vegas nightspot Hakkasan. His three-year deal earns him a reported $400,000 per appearance.
Forbes calculates its figures using information from Pollstar, which tracks tour revenues, Nielsen, which measures music sales, and the Recording Industry Association of America, as well as interviews with those involved in the inner workings of business.
Since its introduction in 2003, the tax-credit system has been plagued with problems. For more than a decade, HM Revenue & Customs has struggled to respond swiftly to families’ changing circumstances, resulting in hundreds of thousands of people unwittingly owing money after being overpaid working tax credit and child tax credit. In the year to June 2016, Citizens Advice helped people with 40,000 issues relating to tax credit overpayments, a 6% increase on the previous year.
In 2014, it was reported that the government was pursuing more than 4.7m cases of overpaid tax credits, amounting to total debts of £1.6bn, and using debt collectors to do so. Since then, it seems to have continued to take a heavy-handed approach. In the past year, Citizens Advice has seen a 32% increase in the number of issues related to the recovery of tax-credit overpayments, including the involvement of debt collectors. In some cases, debt-collection agencies hold inaccurate information from HMRC and are chasing money from individuals who already been making payments via direct debit.
Anna Mee, 38, from Leicestershire spent hours on the phone trying to find out why she was being chased by a debt collector when she had been paying a direct debit to HMRC for more than a year, to clear overpayments in working tax credit and child tax credit.
The mother of three, who works in catering, said: “In the tax year 2014-15 I started the year as a single mum, unemployed. Then I became self-employed and then employed with my partner moving in. I told HMRC of every change but I still ended up with a £1,600 overpayment.”
Once she was informed that she owed money, Mee cleared £800 straight away and set up a direct-debit payment to clear the rest. She had been paying £20 a month by direct debit for a year when she received a letter from HMRC saying £600 was due outright. “I freaked out. I rang up, told them about the direct debit and they said to treat the letter like a statement and to ignore it, so I did.”
Mee then received a second letter from HMRC asking her to clear the £600 balance and treated it as a statement too, as she had been advised to. “Months later, I got a letter out of the blue from a debt-collection agency rather than HMRC. I was really upset.” Mee didn’t want to ring the debt collector because she feared that meant she would be accepting responsibility for the debt.
“I contacted HMRC and after lots of faffing around they said it was linked with the overpayment. They told me to ring the debt collector to explain. I was really unhappy about doing this so I got on to managers at HMRC and eventually they told me to quote a reference number to the debt collector. They said it was happening a lot recently,” she said.
Mee reluctantly contacted the debt-collection agency and was immediately asked if the debt was related to HMRC, before being asked for a reference number. “It seemed like it was an automated process, like this sort of thing happens all the time. They took the reference number and said ‘that’s fine’. I haven’t heard anything since,” she says. “It was a massive headache and a real worry for something that wasn’t my fault in the first place, and I was the one who had to sort it all out.”
The Credit Services Association, the UK trade body for debt-collection firms, told Guardian Money it was unable to comment as it was a matter for HMRC.
Labour MP Frank Field, chair of the work and pensions select committee, said the government needed to act immediately to rectify the errors that had triggered the overpayments.
“Following the nightmare situations they’ve been put through by Concentrix [the US firm formerly hired to handle claims], and now the hounding they’ve received from debt collectors, it’s as though thousands of hard-up families can claim tax credits only once they’ve been put through a menacing obstacle course by HMRC,” Field told the Guardian.
“Having acted swiftly to remove the Concentrix-shaped obstacle from the course, those families will now wish to see the government act immediately to rectify those errors that have triggered overpayments, and to ease off on the use of debt collectors. Such action is necessary if the prime minister’s pledge to protect Britain’s vulnerable underbelly is to be fulfilled.”
HMRC said that in a small number of cases a debt-collection agency may contact a claimant who already has a payment arrangement with HMRC. In such instances, HMRC will instruct the debt-collection agency to return the case immediately. It would not say how it expected to find out if an agency had contacted a claimant.
An HMRC spokesman said: “We work hard to ensure claimants receive the right tax-credits payments, but where an overpayment has been made on a claim, it’s only fair that the claimant pays that money back. We understand that not everyone can pay this back straightaway, and anyone who is worried that they will have difficulty repaying that money should contact us as soon as possible and we’ll explain the options available. When we let a customer down, we always apologise and put matters right.”
Theresa May’s adviser on the future of work says the boom in the gig economy could have a significant impact on government finances, with self-employed workers and contractors paying more than £2,000 less a year on average in tax than employees doing equivalent jobs.
Matthew Taylor, the former Downing Street policy expert who the prime minister has appointed to review modern employment practices – including in the fast-growing sector of app-based work for companies such as Uber and Deliveroo – said on Tuesday: “There is no question that the growth of self-employment and incorporation is having a significant impact on our revenues.”
It is not known how many of the UK’s 4.7m self-employed workers are engaged in work that could also be classed as employment, but if only 10% were, that could imply an annual loss to the exchequer of close to £1bn, according to the Guardian’s estimate.
The exchequer does not receive employer national insurance contributions on behalf of self-employed workers.
Taylor’s warning, as the review was formally launched, comes amid growing scrutiny of the employment status of workers in the gig economy. Last month, Uber, a taxi app relying on 40,000 self-employed drivers, lost an employment tribunal case when judges asserted that drivers should be classed as workers. That could mean Uber must pay national insurance contributions, as well as sick pay and paid holiday. Uber is appealing against the ruling.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, also warned last week of the “structural effect of rapidly rising incorporation and self-employment, which further erodes revenues”.
Writing in the Guardian, Taylor says Britain’s employment system “has weaknesses and is not future-proof”, and adds that the gig economy is only set to grow. He says some retailers are considering adopting Uber-style self-employment models, and are asking whether “they need people employed to work a full shift in our shop and can instead have people on call who come in for an hour or two during busy periods”.
Taylor will report back to Theresa May next year on modern employment practices and says he is concerned about businesses which “impose the expectations and obligations of employees but, by defining workers as self-employed, deny them their due rights”.
Hermes, the parcel delivery giant which uses 10,500 self-employed couriers, is currently facing an HM Revenue and Customs investigation following multiple allegations from couriers that they should be classed as workers or employees rather than contractors. Several have said they are paid less than the national minimum wage.
The government has also announced the first official study of its kind into the scale of the gig economy and the reasons people join it, and appointed three experts to Taylor’s panel. They are Paul Broadbent the chief executive of the Gangmasters Licensing Authority, Greg Marsh, the founder of the web-based homes rental site Onefinestay, and leading employment lawyer Diane Nichol. From January to March the review will take evidence in public hearings across the UK in a tour planned to take in towns and cities including Glasgow, Coventry and Maidstone.
The business minister Margot James said the government recognised the need to be open to innovative working, but said: “It is crucial that workers receive a decent wage and that people working in all sorts of jobs are able to benefit from the right balance of flexibility, rights and protections.”
Taylor also suggested that companies which lost employment tribunals should face automatic investigations to check whether illegal behaviour such as underpayment of the minimum wage or false self-employment were endemic.
“If an employer is found to be paying under the minimum wage on one or more cases, it should be more automatic that we go in and find out if those behaviours are rife in that organisation,” he said.
For work in the UK it can feel like the best of times and the worst of times. We have a flexible labour market, a strong and internationally envied record of job creation and a solid framework of individual rights. Yet hardly a day seems to go by without stories of workers being unfairly treated, whether in long-established areas of employment such as retail or care, or through new technology-enabled enterprises. Protecting our strengths while tackling the weaknesses is the overarching task facing the review of modern employment that the government has asked me to undertake. It is a daunting task but the prime minister is right to see it as a priority.
One of the key issues for the review is ensuring that our system of employment rules are fit for the fast-changing world of work. The UK’s framework of employment protections and entitlements exists to help correct the inherent power imbalance between employers and employees. Rights such as access to paid annual leave and protection from discrimination provide the statutory base line on to which most employers add further benefits as part of the employment contract. Entitlements such as the national minimum wage, employer pension contributions and parental leave also contribute to wider public policy goals.
Ensuring that workers get their due protections and entitlements is often an issue of enforcement and the review will explore whether we could do better at making sure such rules are observed. If one employee wins a claim against an employer is there a case to automatically investigate whether colleagues are also being short-changed?
As a result of government policy and changes in the labour market, self-employed people now make up about 15% of those in work in the UK. The self-employed have more flexibility and pay lower taxes in the form of national insurance, but they do not enjoy the rights or protections of employees. While there are genuine grey areas, sometimes businesses appear to impose the expectations and obligations of employees but, by defining workers as self-employed, deny them their due rights and entitlements. The review will explore how clearer information and better support – including new forms of worker representation – might enable people to understand and enforce their rights.
Another important issue is the way our employment and tax system interact. Arrangements such as self-employment and sole trader incorporation can provide flexibility for all parties but there is also a strong financial incentive at play. Not only do the self-employed pay lower national insurance contributions, but unlike employees their labour isn’t subject to employer’s NI. If two people are doing the same task and earning the same basic remuneration on average earnings, the total tax paid to the state for the employee is about £2,000 a year more than for a self-employed contractor, or as much as £3,000 if they are working through their own company. Yet, apart from some particular entitlements such as paternity pay, the self-employed access exactly the same share of public spending per head as employees. I was pleased that the chancellor said in his autumn statement that there are issues here both of fairness between different types of worker and the long-term resilience of the tax base – and he set out that the Treasury is considering these issues.
Technology is making it easier to break down jobs into small parcels and to engage people in forms of “gig” work. Current employment and tax rules add an extra incentive to this process and encourage people to set up their own companies. I believe strongly that in achieving a fair, flexible and sustainable framework for employment, there are important roles to be played by employers, trade unions, consumers and entrepreneurs. In America, for example, new business models are combining gig work with employee ownership. As well as the challenges, the review will look at the opportunities new forms of work create for groups such as older workers and carers, and also the scope for new career progression routes.
Work is central to society, to the economy and to our individual lives. There is much to be proud of in the UK’s jobs record but our current system has weaknesses and is not future-proof. If the review succeeds it will help our nation be a leader not just in flexibility and job creation but also in laying the basis for a socially just and economically dynamic employment system fit for the future.
I have taken over the financial affairs of an elderly dementia sufferer. In March 2013, he signed up with Money Club and paid an annual fee of £98. At that time he had just started losing his memory and he does not own a computer or have the mental capacity to use the service, so I’m baffled as to how it sold him the membership. Another £98 was taken in March 2014 and since then a further 20 payments have been taken by direct debit totalling £2,148. I have attempted to contact Money Club without success. He should only have been charged three payments of £98 from 2013 to 2016. JS, Manchester
The Money Club has a habit of cold calling with the offer of a free trial, then committing householders to an annual subscription without them being fully aware of what they are signing up to. Calling itself “the UK’s premier shopping club”, it runs a discount and cashback website. Several Cash readers have found themselves paying way over the odds as the annual £98 subscription is randomly debited. One reader recently told me an account had been debited 29 times in five years.
The Money Club blames a computer upgrade. “The frequency of his payments, which should have been set to annually, was left blank and, as a result, collections have been made on a fairly arbitrary basis,” it says. “We can find no trace of him using the club, which is probably why the error has not been picked up.”
It is refunding all the payments, but you should make sure the direct debit is cancelled.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
The town is a mile from this three-bedroom cottage facing the Atlantic spray, although the public car park a few yards away tempts the crowds nearer than you might wish. Gaze over the sea from the vaulted living room and the wrap-around terrace, and launch your boat from a slipway at the end of the 1.7 acres of garden. The interiors have been done up with rustic chic, and there was permission to turn a fisherman’s hut into a studio but it has lapsed. The price dwarfs the size of the accommodation, however. Guide price: £795,000. Savills , 01872 243200
Supermarket shoppers can pick up everything they need for Christmas dinner for eight people for less than £20 this year, a survey has found.
The cost of buying 11 Christmas dinner essentials – including a turkey, plum pudding, fresh vegetables and cranberry sauce – comes out at £19.82, or £2.48 a head, after shopping around for the best prices at Aldi, Lidl, Asda, Morrisons and Iceland, Good Housekeeping magazine found in its annual festive shopping basket cost survey.
Good Housekeeping tracked the price of the 11 products across 10 major supermarket chains and found prices were the cheapest since it began its survey eight years ago. The overall cost has dropped 10.8% since 2009, when the price for Christmas dinner was £2.78 a head.
The reduced cost of groceries at Aldi and Lidl was the main contributor to the fall in the overall price of the Christmas dinner shopping basket compared to 2015, according to Good Housekeeping.
Food prices generally have been driven down in recent years as the big four supermarkets – Tesco, Asda, Sainbury’s and Morrisons – have reacted to the rise of German discounters Aldi and Lidl with aggressive price cutting.
However, supermarkets have warned that prices are likely to rise next year as the falling value of the pound against the dollar and euro following the vote to leave the EU pushes up the price of imported products and ingredients.
Of the 11 foods tracked by Good Housekeeping to provide a Christmas meal with all the trimmings, six have gone down in price, including turkey, and three have stayed the same as last year. Only the prices of Christmas pudding and mince pies have increased, as the price of imported raisins, butter, flour and sugar has jumped since 2015, due to a combination of factors including the collapse of the pound and weaker supplies.
Aldi was the cheapest supermarket for those wanting a one-stop shop, where the ingredients for Christmas dinner for eight cost just £22.03. Aldi’s basket is 11% cheaper than last year’s winner, Iceland, which this year falls to third place (£24.81), behind Lidl in second place (£24.57). The most expensive basket was from Marks & Spencer (£49.40) followed by Waitrose (£40.02).
“Supermarket shoppers will be relieved to see Christmas essentials are still so affordable,” said Caroline Bloor, the consumer director of Good Housekeeping. “While five of the supermarkets have cheaper baskets this year, it’s mainly thanks to the big decrease in the cost of these groceries at Aldi and Lidl that the overall basket is significantly cheaper. So think carefully where you shop or you could end up paying twice as much.”
Tony Baines, the joint managing director of corporate buying at Aldi, said: “At Aldi, our customers get the same quality as M&S and Waitrose, but at prices significantly cheaper than Iceland. We know that this is more important than ever at Christmas time.”
This year’s Christmas Dinner Index, from analysts Mintec, which compares the cost of a slightly different basket of products including turkey, vegetables and pork, found that the price of the festive meal rose by 1% year-on-year and is still lower than both 2013 and 2014.
Potato prices rose 52% in the year to November, it said, as bad weather hit yields and delayed planting and harvesting, while similar conditions contributed to a 65% rise in onion prices. Parsnips were up 14%, but carrot prices were down year-on-year thanks to lower demand in Europe, where domestic supplies were higher.
Strong demand in China and worries about lower production in the UK sent pork prices higher by 14% year-on-year. But that was offset by a 2% drop in turkey prices, which accounts for a larger proportion of the meal and weighs more heavily on the index.
But Mintec warned shoppers that there could be further price rises ahead. “It is worth noting that prices are likely to rise in December as demand continues to increase,” it said. “So stocking up on turkey and pork early is probably the best course of action.”
The quietly devastating National Audit Office (NAO) report shreds five years of ministerial bluster, misinformation and spin about the purported virtues of benefit sanctions, arguably one of the most brutal, controversial and ineffectual social policies of recent times.
Sanctions are a punishment applied to benefit claimants adjudged to have infringed jobcentre rules. If claimants fail to turn up for appointments or to apply for enough jobs, officials effectively fine them by stopping their benefit payments for a minimum of four weeks (around £300). Between 2011 and 2015, almost one in four of all jobseeker’s allowance claimants were sanctioned. In 2015 alone, sanctions led to an estimated £132m in benefits being withheld from some of the UK’s poorest citizens.
Anti-poverty campaigners, food banks, academics and MPs have warned for years that sanctions were dangerous: they can lead to debt and rent arrears, depression, hunger, food bank use, survival crime, destitution and worse. Sanctions, they have pointed out, can be handed out capriciously or cynically to meet jobcentre targets. In some cases, such as that of diabetic former soldier David Clapson, found dead in his flat in 2013, starved and penniless, the potentially lethal consequences of benefit sanctions have seemed incontrovertible.
The Department for Work and Pensions has imperiously dismissed those warnings throughout. It has regularly assured us that sanctions “work”. They provide a deterrent effect to the half-hearted job seeker, and a kick up the backside to the lazy and feckless to make them “focus and get on”, the DWP insists. Sanctions, claimed the former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith in March, were “the reason why we now have the highest employment levels ever in the UK”.
The NAO reveals that those assertions were essentially baseless. The DWP had no clue whether sanctions worked, and zero interest in finding out. When the scope and severity of sanctions were increased in 2012, leading to a rapid rise in the number affected, it had no evidence to justify the change and no idea what the likely effect on claimants would be. It did not know the financial costs of sanctions or the wider knock-on impact on health services, let alone any potential benefits, and actively resisted any attempt by others to find out. Last year the DWP summarily rejected calls from both an all-party committee of MPs and its own social security advisory committee for a formal review of sanctions.
Most damning of all is the unravelling of the claim by ministers that sanctions are instrumental in getting people into work. This was a fragile claim to begin with: the DWP’s own advisers have pointed out that there is no evidence to support it. Employment companies running the DWP’s work programme warned last year that for most jobseekers, sanctions actually made getting a job harder.
The DWP cites flimsy international studies to support its claim that sanctions lead to jobs, but has never analysed its own data to discover how stopping benefits affects claimant behaviour or employment outcomes. 
The NAO conducted its own preliminary analysis of DWP data and found that sanctioned claimants were as likely to stop claiming benefits altogether as they were to get a job. The effect on sick and disabled unemployed claimants was even more stark: the NAO found sanctions were likely to have discouraged them from working.
That the DWP’s benefit sanctions policy in recent years was created in a largely evidence-free zone, or that once it was in place, ministers misrepresented its effects (and were upbraided by the statistics watchdog), or that it sought to dismiss any criticism, however well founded, will surprise no one who has followed social security in the Duncan Smith era. The benefit cap is a similarly aggressive policy championed by ministers with a fervent faith out of all proportion with the evidence that it works.
The challenge for the current work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, who likes to suggest that he is cut from a different cloth from his controversial predecessor-but-one, is to show that he can listen to the NAO’s concerns. The first step, the NAO says, should be to institute a wide-ranging review of sanctions; the second, a genuine attempt to understand their wider impact. Green’s response should tell us whether he really offers any new insights, or simply more of the same.
Nils Pratley (PM needs to stand firm on executive pay ratios, 29 November) alerts us to the fact that directors are already lobbying hard to water down Theresa May’s early proposal to shed light on employee pay ratios. May was unrelenting in her support for the austerity policies imposed by her government since 2010 and the havoc they have created for the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in our in our society. Now’s the time for her to do what she said she would do.
What’s the risk in making companies publish details of every employee’s terms and contracts of employment, pension contributions, share options, severance terms, expense account arrangements, perks etc? Not all boardrooms are full of self-serving, me-first executives. However, many are. It was the boards of our leading banks and financial institutions – working hand in glove with some of the most unsavoury characters in the business world – who created the problems we are facing today. It’s time for business leaders to stand up and be counted. How many can truly say that their employees are fairly treated?
David Beswick
Harrogate, North Yorkshire
• As regards worker representation on boards, “We are not going to make it happen,” Greg Clark told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that the government did not want to “overturn what has been a successful system which has had the confidence of business around the world”. Success for whom or what, one should ask; it certainly has not been good for the workers, whom the government supposedly represents – democracy does not include votes from self-serving legal entities. We also should consider its success in Germany and other European countries. 
Robert Sherman
Barrister and accredited mediator, London
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
An 89-year-old war veteran who placed an advert in his local paper to find a job to stop him “dying of boredom” has said he is hoping for a happy ending and part-time work.
Joe Bartley, from Paignton in south Devon, placed the ad in the Herald Express twice last month. It reads: “Senior citizen 89 seeks employment in Paignton area. 20hrs+ per week. Still able to clean, light gardening, DIY and anything. I have references. Old soldier, airborne forces. Save me from dying of boredom!”
Bartley told the Guardian the reaction to his advert has been “blinkin’ mad”, adding that he was in danger of becoming a celebrity.
“When I first put in the ad, I thought it was just an old guy looking for work – I don’t really see what is strange about that,” he said. “But have I now reached celebrity status? That might worry some people, but it doesn’t worry me. I’m rather chuffed in a way.”
Bartley has lived alone since his wife Cassandra died two years ago. “I miss my wife dreadfully, and when you live on your own there is no one to speak to. Since she died I’ve moved into a flat and it’s a big block. Once you walk into that flat it’s like solitary confinement.”
Bartley, who is originally from Liverpool but has lived in Devon for more than 50 years, has no children and he is in not in regular contact with his late wife’s family. Since the advert went out he has been contacted by an old friend in North Devon, and hopes others might see his story and get in touch.
“I like reading, and I’ll watch a bit of television but there’s a lot of guff on these days. I just got bored stiff with nothing to do, and I thought even though I am 89 I can still work. I can work a hoover, I can clean tables, some gardening - anything really.”
Bartley has already taken phone calls from two different “lady callers”, who offered him odd-job work, but not the regular part-time work he is looking for. “One wanted a wardrobe put together, and another lady said she needed two rooms painted – but I told them it’s regular work I’m after.”
The veteran, who was member of the Airborne Forces and served in Palestine after the second world war, said he wanted regular work to be able to pay his bills. “I wanted at least 20 hours and then I can cover the rent. I get housing support, which is great, but I want to be my own man and pay my own way.”
The pensioner served in the army for 11 years, joining just before the end of the war when he was 18. “I did enjoy the comradeship, but then I sometimes wonder if it was a bit of a waste of my life, when I think of what else I could have done.”
He then trained as a signwriter. “It was a good trade that went out of the window with plastic signs. I’ve still got all my old gear, but my hands are a bit stiff these days,” he said.
Although the offer of regular part-time work has not arrived yet, Bartley is hopeful that he will find work that will use his skills, keep him occupied and introduce him to new people.
“I’m really glad I put the advert in, hopefully something good will come of it,” he said. “The thing that has always kept me going is my sense of humour. I like a laugh – and I like a happy ending.”
A row has broken out over the use of animal fat in the new plastic £5 note, with calls from some vegans and vegetarians for the production process to be changed.
A petition has been launched calling for the use of tallow, a substance made from animal fat, in the banknotes to be stopped. The petition has attracted more than 70,000 supporters so far and will be delivered to the Bank of England.
The petition says: “The new £5 notes contain animal fat in the form of tallow. This is unacceptable to millions of vegans and vegetarians in the UK. We demand that you cease to use animal products in the production of currency that we have to use.”
The Bank of England declined to comment on the petition. A spokeswoman said the issue was the polymer that the new £5 notes are printed on, which contains tallow. The central bank buys polymer pellets from an external company, Innovia Security, which supplies banknote substrate for 80 denominations in 24 countries.
The issue came to light when the Bank responded to a question on Twitter, confirming that the polymer pellets contained traces of tallow.
The issue caused a storm on Twitter, where people voiced their protest on behalf of vegans, vegetarians and some religious groups. Tallow is also used to make household items such as candles and soap.
But others offered to take the £5 plastic notes off vegans’ hands.
The new plastic fivers entered circulation in September and are much hardier than paper money – they can survive being drenched in red wine or a spin in the washing machine. However, they shrink and melt at temperatures above 120C, so can be damaged by an iron. They are hard to tear – but if they do suffer a nick they then tear easily. The Bank has also had to admit that brand new polymer notes can sometimes stick together.
Plastic money is used in many other countries, some of which have switched completely to polymer banknotes, such as Australia, Canada, Romania and Vietnam.
A wide range of high-cost credit – from catalogue loans to overdrafts – is to be reviewed by the Financial Conduct Authority in a move that could herald price caps similar to those imposed on payday loans.
Since 2015, the City regulator has prevented payday loan customers paying back any more than twice the value of the amount borrowed. The FCA will now look at whether the cap has restricted credit, driving customers to loan sharks. The findings of the review will be published in the summer of 2017.
It is thought that as many as 400,000 people use high-cost credit deals from retailers to buy household appliances and furniture. After interest is added, consumers can often end up paying more than twice the original price, spread over a number of years.
Andrew Bailey, the chief executive of the FCA, said: “This is a significant moment for our approach to consumer credit regulation as we continue to ensure that this market works well for consumers.
“We have come up to the point of reviewing the cap on payday lending, making now the right time to take a broader view of the issues around high-cost credit, including unarranged overdrafts, and to consider whether our requirements remain appropriate.”
The evidence-gathering exercise – known as a call for inputs – will look at whether high-cost loans are causing detriment to customers. This could prompt the FCA to take action, such as imposing caps on rates. It listed doorstep lending, catalogue credit, some rent-to-own, pawnbroking, guarantor and logbook loans – where cars are used as security – as being in its sights. 
Overdrafts are also part of the review, which the regulator signalled earlier this month when it said these loan facilities would be part of its review into high-interest loans.
The regulator is also aiming to establish what impact its intervention on payday loans has had. High-cost, short-term credit loans are capped at 0.8% of the amount borrowed per day, and for borrowers who do not repay their loans on time, default charges must not exceed £15. 
“The FCA is also keen to see if there is any evidence of consumers turning to illegal money lenders directly as a result of being excluded from high-cost credit because of the price cap,” the regulator said. 
Theresa May is not back-pedalling on her pledge to give workers a voice on company boards, the business secretary has said in response to criticism of the government’s announcement that it will not force companies to give employees a governance position.
The government unveiled proposals on Tuesday to tackle corporate excess. May had raised the prospect of placing employee representatives on boards during her Conservative leadership campaign over the summer, but has since told businesses she will not make them do so.
Greg Clark said the prime minister wanted workers to be represented, but not necessarily by having an employee on the board.
“We are not going to make it happen,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that the government did not want to “overturn what has been a successful system which has had the confidence of business around the world”.
“What we are proposing today is a range of proposals, including a non-executive director who has an explicit obligation to engage with the workforce, to report into the board, to chair a stakeholder panel and influence the renumeration committee.”
Asked if the government was breaking the spirit of May’s promise, Clark said: “I don’t think that’s right – this is a big change in the way that we have conducted corporate governance. We have this legal tradition of having a unitary board, not delegates of groups but function for the whole interests of the company. That has been successful so I would not want to mandate the replacement of something that had been successful.”
The Trades Union Congress urged May to stick to her promise of putting workers on boards. Speaking earlier in the programme, the general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “It It is very clear from the poll the TUC is publishing today, that the majority of people want the prime minister to keep her promise to have elected workers on boards. That’s not just because it’s the right thing to do, it is better for business too.
“In countries that have workers on boards, which is the majority in Europe, it shows that they have better investment in R&D, better investment in skills and they tend to take decision that are more about the long term, because of course, workers are champions of the long-term success of a company because their livelihoods depend on it.”
She urged May not to water down the promise by substituting workers on boards with a person who would represent the “voice of workers”.
“Having a glorified suggestion box or giving that responsibility to an existing member of the board does not amount to a genuine voice for workers. The only way you can have a genuine voice for workers is workers elect them.”
She said people were fed up with the behaviour of some boards. 
“There has been a degree of snobbery about whether workers can cut it in the board room. It is important that the prime minister, who said on the day of the autumn statement that she made no apologies for the fact that her government is going to deliver on that promise. If she doesn’t then people will question what other promises could be broken.”
Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, said May had “rowed back on her flagship policy of putting workers on boards. Sadly, this green paper looks like offering tokenism rather than a much-needed call to action.
“The real test has to be whether these proposals would have saved jobs and pensions at BHS or prevented the gross mistreatment of staff at Sports Direct, and whether they’ll tackle the scourge of low pay and escalated executive pay. Anything that falls short of doing that is just not good enough.”
Among the proposals for corporate reform could be the idea of publishing pay ratios – the difference between the chief executive’s pay and that of the workforce.
The green paper will have three sections: one on remuneration, one on stakeholder engagement and a third that asks what elements of these should apply to private companies.
Britain’s banks and building societies are promising a radical change to the way account holders send money to other people in a bid to tackle ballooning fraud and “fat finger” problems.
In future, the “confirmation of payee” system will mean that when someone types in a sort code and account number to transfer some money, they will receive an instant message saying something like “Is ‘Fred Bloggs’ the person/business you intended to send the money to?” Crucially, this will appear before the money leaves the person’s account.
Currently, customers only receive a confirmation that they have sent their money to a specific sort code and account number. Many people also type in the account name of the person they’re paying, but this is irrelevant as banks do not cross-check this element when processing payments.
The result is cases where individuals enter a wrong number on the eight-digit account number – dubbed a fat finger error – and the money goes to an unintended recipient. In some cases the mistake can be repeated for years – and the banks are not liable.
In one case covered by the Guardian, a hairdresser intended to send her monthly salary payment from HSBC to a joint Nationwide account with her husband, but initially entered a digit incorrectly. Over two years £26,000 of her pay went to another individual with a Nationwide account, and she has spent years fighting to recover it.
A new-style fraud, meanwhile, is seeing criminals hijack the emails of builders or solicitors. Customers are sent instructions to make future payments to a new account – still in the name of the builder or solicitor – with a new account number. In one case a couple were conned into sending £25,000 to the wrong account, and their bank refused any compensation.
According to the Payment Strategy Forum (PSF), which is handling the implementation for the banks and building societies, the “confirmation of payee” system should largely eliminate both problems. Account holders will still not have to enter the intended recipient’s name, but will continue to enter the sort code and account number as they do currently – crucially, however, they will then receive a message matching the sort code and account number with the specific account holder – such as “John Smith Builders”.
The exact implementation date and the precise message that account holders will be sent is yet to be determined, as the move requires a major systems change at banks to enable them to instantly identify recipients. The PSF says the latest date will be 2020, but it hopes the system could be in place for launch in 2018.
“The confirmation of payee system ... will allow people to avoid sending payments to the wrong account, either by accident or being tricked into doing so, by ensuring a confirmation of the recipient is sent to the payer before any funds leave their account,” said Ruth Evans, chair of the forum, which is also examining ways in which account holders can bar their regular direct debits from leaving their account when they are short of money.
Currently, if someone is close to their overdraft limit and, say, they have an unusually large mobile phone bill that month, it could push them into hefty charges when it is paid by the bank, or be bounced and leave the account holder with a possible unpaid transaction fee.
The forum’s proposal is for a “request to pay” system whereby the mobile phone company would have to send a message to the account holder, through the bank, that it is about to take payment. The account holder could then accept or decline the payment.
Evans said: “Request to pay will allow customers to authorise a regular payment, such as a utility bill or gym membership, before the company withdraws the money from their account. This will be a huge boost to people on variable incomes who may struggle to settle their accounts at the same time each month.”
About £75tn in payments was processed through Britain’s banks and building societies last year, but it is estimated that about £755m was stolen.
In September, consumer body Which? lodged a “supercomplaint” with financial regulators demanding that UK banks do more to protect customers tricked into transferring money to fraudsters.
Which? said banks should “shoulder more responsibility” when someone is conned into transferring money, just as they reimburse customers who lose money due to scams involving debit and credit cards or fraudulent account activity.
HSBC, which I have personally banked with since 1964, recently announced that it will close the four accounts we hold for the campaign organisation Searchlight following a “review”. In a follow-up email it insisted there is nothing we can do to change the decision and that it will not give us a reason.
Searchlight has campaigned against racism and fascism for 52 years, published a magazine since 1975, and is well respected. We are not aligned to any political party and are multi-faith. We currently work with the University of Northampton and recently launched a research arm, Searchlight Research Associates, with many distinguished patrons.
We have no overdraft facility – our income comes from occasional grants, donations and subscriptions and is paid in by cheque, standing order or bank transfer. We have hardly any international transactions. We can think of nothing in our use of the accounts that could possibly give rise to any concerns.
The only reason I can think of is that the fascist individuals and organisations that Searchlight combats have maliciously given false information to the bank for the sole purpose of getting our accounts closed, and the bank has accepted it without investigation. Obviously, this is very disruptive and we are applying for new accounts with another bank but we don’t know whether it will accept our application in view of HSBC’s action. Although HSBC is acting within its terms and conditions, its unilateral action is contrary to all principles of justice. GG, Ilford, Essex
There’s nothing you can do to change the decision, says HSBC – except write to the media. As soon as I contact the bank you receive a flurry of phone calls and then two senior officials beg a meeting. The upshot is that the four accounts are reinstated with no more of an explanation than when they were closed. Its press office will only comment opaquely: “HSBC aims to provide the highest standard of customer service … where this has not been met we endeavour to work closely with the customer to resolve any issue as soon as possible.”
Abrupt closure of bank accounts without explanation is becoming a worryingly frequent issue in my inbox as banks run scared of draconian US crackdowns on anyone deemed complicit in money laundering. HSBC narrowly avoided prosecution by the US Congress, so the chances are it is neurotically reacting to any account with political overtones or foreign transactions, be it owned by a suburban householder or a high-profile campaigning group.
You’re lucky. Very rarely in my experience do the banks capitulate and reverse their decisions, however mystifying.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
The government has promised to “stamp out” abuses highlighted in a Guardian campaign that revealed how some buyers of new-build homes have been left with virtually unsaleable properties because of rapidly escalating ground rents.
Many buyers of new-build homes, particularly in the north west of England, have been sold their properties on a leasehold basis. Traditionally homes have been sold freehold, but new-style leasehold homes come with ground rents that in some cases double every 10 years. Residents are facing rising costs, or struggling to sell their properties when they want to move.
Answering a question raised by the MP Peter Bottomley, communities secretary Sajid Javid said: “We must make sure the kind of abuses he mentioned are stamped out and we will continue to do everything [we can]. We do work with a number of stakeholders and we can certainly see how we can do more.”
In one case reported by the Guardian, a buyer of a £101,000 flat in Dudley built in 2010 by Taylor Wimpey found that his wife’s ground rent was set to spiral to £8,000 a year. He said the couple were now trapped in an apartment they could no longer sell because the ground rent review clause in the lease was preventing lenders approving a mortgage.
Clair Scott was another new home buyer devastated by soaring ground rents that have made her £200,000 mid-terrace three-bed house in Bolton, built only six years ago, almost unsaleable.
She claims solicitors advised her buyers not to touch her house as the terms of the lease meant that by 2060 the ground rent would be £9,440 a year. “The sale fell through, and all parties involved are devastated after losing a lot of time and money.”
Others have revealed how houses were sold by developers with the promise that a 999-year lease was “virtually freehold” only to discover that buying out the lease just a few years later was three or four times more expensive than promised.
Bottomley, MP for Worthing West, has been among the sternest critics of leasehold issues for many years.
In a House of Commons question following the government’s promise to build thousands of new homes, he said: “Given that half the new homes will be leasehold, and given the past problems, the present difficulties and the future possibilities of abuse, will my right honourable friend please get together with the Sunday Times and the Guardian, who are covering these abuses, and reassure ordinary people buying their first home that they don’t find it unsaleable and of no value when they come to leave?”
Analysis by campaign group Leasehold Knowledge Partnership earlier this month revealed that nearly £2bn-worth of new-build leasehold houses were sold in England and Wales last year. In most cases, the developer sells the freehold after a couple of years to a private company, which are then sometimes accused of demanding extortionate fees by homebuyers.
Ground rents are distinct from service charges, which are levied on top. The service charge in a block of flats will pay, for example, for the upkeep of the “common parts” of a development. But no services are offered in return for the ground rent, which is more akin to a tax.
Ground rents have become hugely popular among some investors, as they promise a lucrative guaranteed future income stream at a time when interest rates are at historic lows. Until 2011, the ground rent escalation clauses in many Taylor Wimpey contracts allowed for doubling every ten years, although since then they have shifted to an RPI basis.
Following the Guardian’s campaign, Taylor Wimpey has also promised to review its contracts. It said: “We hadn’t been aware of the concern of some customers and homeowners regarding these pre-RPI clauses and the difficulties that they are currently experiencing in selling or mortgaging their homes. Having heard the cases described and in order to establish the facts, we are undertaking a review of this situation.”
However, conveyancing solicitors who enabled the purchase of a leasehold property without highlighting onerous ground rent clauses are now facing a raft of legal actions from furious buyers.
The government has confirmed state pension will rise by 2.5% in April 2017, as a report shows that the “triple lock” promise on payments could push up the cost of providing the benefit by more than a third over the next three decades.
From April, pensioners on the new flat rate pension will see their weekly payments increase to £159.55 from £155.65 currently, while the old state pension will rise to £122.30 from £119.30.
The increase is in line with earnings growth, and also the minimum payment promised to pensioners through the triple lock.
This promise, introduced in 2010 by George Osborne, says that each year pensions will rise by whichever is the highest figure out of inflation, earnings growth and 2.5%. The pledge is set to continue until 2020, but in his recent autumn statement the new chancellor, Philip Hammond, hinted that it could be scrapped after that.
Figures from independent research group Pensions Policy Institute show that if it is kept, the cost of providing a state pension will rise from 5.3% of GDP currently, to 7.2% by 2046. Without changes to the state pension age, which will mean from 2028 it can only be claimed at age 67, the cost would have been another 0.3% of GDP the PPI said.
Commenting on the increase to weekly payments, Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at IFA firm Hargreaves Lansdown, said it was ironic that earnings growth had hit the 2.5% figure promised by the government, making the government’s promise to underpin the increase redundant.
“There is a fair bet that this time next year, it’ll be inflation hitting the highest number,” he said.
He added: “Pensioners can’t continue to enjoy indefinitely a ‘heads I win, tails you lose’ guarantee at the expense of taxpayers. A review now looking beyond 2020 makes sense.”
McPhail said there were reasons to be cautious in favour of those approaching retirement. “Final salary pay outs are about to start diminishing and some are arguing that existing private pension inflation proofing should be cut. Politicians have to strike a delicate balance but if they take too much away from pensioners they could end up sowing the seeds of the next pensioner income crisis.”
The PPI’s report, The New Pensions Landscape, found that both automatic enrolment into pensions and the triple lock were set to increase retirement incomes, but increases to the state pension age meant over their lifetime individuals would receive less on average.
It found that changes to the system meant that on average pensioners were better off that they had ever been, but that those aged between 56 and 60 did face lower incomes in retirement than those who have already stopped work. Current retirees are more likely to have final salary pensions and to receive their state pensions for longer.
Daniela Silcock, head of policy research at the PPI said: “Looking forward, both the ‘triple lock’ and automatic enrolment could significantly increase the level of people’s retirement incomes.
“For those nearest state pension age the triple lock has the most immediate effect whereas younger individuals may gain most from automatic enrolment.”
A child born in Britain today may never see fuel poverty eradicated, according to a report backed by the star of I, Daniel Blake –Ken Loach’s critically acclaimed film about the benefits system.
The report, published by charity National Energy Action to kick off its Warm Homes Campaign, documents stagnating efforts to solve fuel poverty. The government has pledged to make as many “fuel poor” homes as possible achieve a minimum standard of energy efficiency by 2030, in an attempt to end fuel poverty.
People in 4 million UK households face restricted life chances because they live in a cold, damp property, according to the NEA report.
It warned that that the current rate of progress in tackling the problem means fuel poverty will not have ended by the time a child born today turns 80. The average life expectancy at birth in the UK is 83 years for girls and 79 for boys, according to the Office for National Statistics.
People are defined as fuel poor in England and Wales if the cost of heating their home is high, but meeting this amount would see them fall below the poverty line.
While the number of fuel poor households is lower than it was at the peak of the recession in 2009, it crept up from 2.36 million in 2012 to 2.38 million in 2014, the latest year for which figures are available.
The average fuel poverty gap – between households’ energy bills and what they can afford to pay – has grown in the past decade from £235 in 2003 to £371 in 2014, or £882m at a national level.
The actor Dave Johns, who played the lead character in I, Daniel Blake, said: “It is a complete scandal that people die because they can’t afford to heat their homes.
“I’m backing NEA’s Warm Homes Campaign to highlight what help is available to cope with rising energy bills as winter takes hold, and demand more support from the government.”
NEA cited low levels of energy efficiency in poor-quality housing and difficulty accessing the cheapest energy tariffs, forcing residents to tolerate the cold or spend more on fuel than wealthier people who live in well-insulated homes.
The UK is lagging behind the rest of the world on energy efficiency measures such as insulation, according to NEA.
The Committee on Climate Change recently said the UK has “no action plan” to improve energy efficiency, while the National Audit Office has lamented the lack of investment.
The Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas said: “We know that investing in energy efficiency reduces people’s bills, cuts carbon emissions and keeps people warm, yet the government is slashing support for insulation. 
“This approach fails people living in fuel poverty who can’t afford to keep their homes warm and is utterly misguided financially.
“Britain should be leading the way, making energy efficiency and home insulation an overriding infrastructure priority.
“Let’s not get left behind other countries who are now leaving us in their wake as they drastically reduce their energy demand.”
NEA also identified stagnant wage growth, coupled with rising energy bills, as the key factors keeping people mired in fuel poverty.
“We need to see much more ambition from national and local government if we are to end the unnecessary cost and suffering caused by fuel poverty,” said the NEA chief executive, Jenny Saunders.
The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “The government is committed to tackling fuel poverty. The warm home discount will ensure that more than 2 million households will receive £140 off their energy bills this winter.
“The best long-term solution is to improve the energy efficiency of households. We are reforming the requirement on energy companies to install efficiency measures in homes across Great Britain, which will insulate 1m homes by 2020, tackling the root cause of fuel poverty.”
A Labour spokesman said: “As the cold weather hits, many people will be worrying about how they’ll pay their energy bills this winter. It is unacceptable that the big six energy companies are raking in profits while families have to choose between heating their home and putting food on the table.
“Labour have led the way by calling for caps on energy bills while we fix our broken energy market. David Cameron promised parliament 17 times that he would force energy companies, by law, to put all customers on their cheapest tariff, but still the government are doing nothing to help people with energy costs. Once again, we have seen that we can’t trust the Tories to stand up for ordinary people.”
The ‘challenger’ energy firm had 160,000 customers, many of whom are in credit. Here’s the lowdown
It may have been Australia’s first values-led business. At least 7,000 years ago, the Gunditjmara people of south-west Victoria created an eel farming system. It would have supplied enough eels for more than 10,000 people, far more than the Gunditjmara population of the time.
The Gunditjmara smoked the eels and traded them with other Aboriginal nations. It was a successful economy based on healthy lifestyles and stewardship that worked with the natural environment as the farms shifted and changed with the seasons, with floods and droughts.
Last year, when I attended Purpose, the values-led business conference, I discovered the similarities between BCorps and the principles that have always governed Aboriginal business. And there is much that non-Indigenous businesses can learn from us when looking for models that create a positive impact on the world and generate prosperity.
The Gunditjmara eel farm was an early example of an Aboriginal economy based on key principles of contemporary values-led business. The farms engaged with seasonal changes to have a positive environmental impact, creating a new ecological system rich with vegetables and waterbirds.
The woven traps were made from biodegradable locally sourced materials. Efficiency was key, with people spending the minimum amount of time acquiring food. The smoked eels were a unique product traded with other nations. And the Gunditjmara Elders had a succession plan. To this day they teach young people how to weave the traps, where to place the stones, and how to smoke the eels.
I named my company Kalinya, which in my language, that of the Yorta Yorta people of northern Victoria, means good, beautiful and honest. This is to serve as a constant reminder to practise Aboriginal ways of working as I move into the business sector.
I have grown up around Aboriginal ways of working where the wellbeing of staff and the extended Aboriginal community comes first. As a small child I would spend hours playing under boardroom tables listening to the debates of my Elders. Both my parents worked in Aboriginal community-controlled organisations, and it was within these places of Aboriginal leadership that I gained an early education in our civil rights history. Kids are welcome within Aboriginal workplaces. We joke and laugh. Our leaders are always accessible. Cultural protocols are valued. And we support each other in times of hardship.
Business is not new to us; our economies stretch back tens of thousands of years. Yolgu people from Arnhem Land were engaging in international trade long before colonisation: the Macassan people would come from Indonesia to trade cloth, tobacco, rice and knives for sea cucumbers that were valued for medicinal purposes.
Post-colonisation, our people continued to run successful enterprises. Coranderrk Station in Healesville, Victoria, ran successfully for many years selling wheat, hops and crafts. In 1881 produce from the farm won first prize at the Melbourne international exhibition.
It was the success of Coranderrk that led to its downfall. When the farms flourished, neighbouring non-Indigenous farmers petitioned that the land was now too valuable for Aboriginal people and the station was closed.
We are coming into a critical time for Aboriginal enterprise. There is a growing interest in Aboriginal knowledge, a trend for uniquely Australian products, and an increased awareness of native foods, medicinal plants and beauty treatments.
But as Aboriginal business owners, we must remember what happened at Coranderrk and equip ourselves for this wave of increased interest. We need to protect our intellectual property and trademark our ideas so we can rebuild our economies in a way that is true to our principles.
When you are systematically pushed out of an economy, it does terrible things for your self-confidence. The hardest part of running a business for me has been valuing my unique knowledge as an Aboriginal woman. For years I have worked 50-hour weeks and lost money. I was partnering with non-Indigenous companies who charge standard industry prices, while I charged reduced rates. I was paying my suppliers double the amount I was charging clients. It was a rookie error but there is something at play that goes beyond the need for business mentoring and support for Aboriginal start-ups. It speaks to our self-confidence.
Colonisation is a system designed to break up social structures. When our people were put on missions, we were robbed of our ability to practise culture, sustain a healthy lifestyle and our economies were broken down. The Gunditjmara could no longer farm eels and our trade routes were destroyed.
Colonisation works by making Indigenous people dependant. As wards of the state, our people were not paid cash, in the new cash economy, but rather given ration cards to get flour, tea and sugar. Our Ancestors built the railroads, made up a large portion of the shearing industry and worked tirelessly as domestic staff, but until the 1970s the government could confiscate 70% of an Aboriginal person’s wage.
To decolonise, we have to understand that Aboriginal people have been systematically pushed out of the Australian economy and rid ourselves of the misconception that we are somehow inherently “bad” with money.
Countless generations of our Ancestors ran successful businesses. They developed unique products and traded with different nations. Our pre-colonisation economies cared for Country. As the Gunditjmara eel farms show, Aboriginal business can have a positive environmental impact.
As our lives have adapted to contemporary Australian life, we have retained Aboriginal ways of working, which put people and culture first. We value the knowledge of our Elders and create succession plans to ensure the wellbeing of future generations. These fundamental principles are at the heart of values-led business. As the sector takes off, it is an opportunity for Aboriginal entrepreneurship to shine.
Elders, Ancestors and Country is capitalised in recognition of Aboriginal kinship structures, relationship to the land and in respect of cultural protocol.
•Jirra Lulla Harvey will be speaking at Purpose Sydney, which runs from 5-6 December
I am delighted to learn that the UK government is to encourage the production of electric cars (Report, 26 November). But there is only a very brief mention of the need for the adequate provision of charge points. My wife and I took delivery of our first electric car, a Nissan Leaf, six months ago. It is our only car. We live in a rural area. We can manage round trips of up to 100 miles easily, relying solely on our domestic charge point for topping up at night.
For longer trips, however, we need to know that there are properly functioning charge points available to enable quick recharges to get us safely home without the anxiety of possibly being stranded on the way back. Unfortunately we regularly find charge points out of order, even in major centres such as Newcastle. On a recent trip to Durham, right on the far edge of our range, we found that the only rapid charge point at an out-of-town park-and-ride centre had been out of order for a long time. If the use of electric cars is to be seriously encouraged, the provision of a good network of readily accessible and reliable charge points has to be given absolute priority.
Clive Wilkinson
Rothbury, Northumberland
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
As a lifelong Rolling Stones fan who fully recognises their genuine respect for the blues and its heritage (Reviews, G2, 25 November), I find it all the more disappointing that their (black) bass player Darryl Jones is not included in band photos and still appears to be treated as a mere hired hand, 23 years after he replaced Bill Wyman.
Graham Larkbey
London
• Nick Wyatt (Letters, 28 November) asks how many bathtubs make one Wales. You can’t equate a measure of volume with one of area, but for the record, if all of the sugary drinks consumed by 11- to 18-year-olds in one year were poured over Wales, the resulting sticky mess would be about an inch deep.
Dr David Harper
Cambridge
• Conundrum: I share the cost of the Guardian with my husband. He reads all the sport section, I find so little reporting of women’s sport that I don’t bother. What percentage should I pay or just continue to use it to light the fire?
Jenny Jeater
Hassocks, West Sussex
• No wonder there are so many estate agents – I learn that not only do they charge me as a landlord a fee for making the inventory of the flat at the change of tenants, they charge the tenant as well (Unfair letting fees ban? Truth is the agents just got too greedy, 26 November).
Mette Marston
London
• Is it really such a shock that Ed’s gone (Last dance for Balls as he steps out of Strictly, 28 November)? Perhaps the voters who challenged the system by backing someone with little expertise beyond buffoonery withdrew their support when they realised where it might lead. Strangely comforting.
John Cranston
Norwich
• If the US president-elect backs down on his promise to build a wall on the Mexican border perhaps he could construct a Trump-l’oeil instead (The billionaire cowboy builder, G2, 28 November).
David Griffith
London
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
I remember when my relationship to money changed. I was a freshman college student with a little extra money from my grants and scholarships. Before I knew it, I was eating at the fanciest restaurants in town. This was the beginning of my “treat yo’ self” journey. In my freshman year, I spent at least $3,000 just eating out.
I was raised by a single mother who worked three jobs to provide me and my brothers with everything we needed and most of what we wanted. Growing up, there never was a large focus on financial literacy or prepping for my future. Now, I wish there had been.
I didn’t shop that much but eating out and traveling effectively diminished all my extra funds. Through a tough biomedical course load and a few tough semesters, I was forced to pick up more jobs to make up for the money I lost in scholarships. Towards the end of my college career I was working three jobs, seven days a week. I was knee-deep into my senior year. To say I was overwhelmed is an understatement.
I was exhausted and began to wonder why I worked so hard when I wasn’t seeing any rewards. Something had to change, and I decided that it would be my lifestyle. The treat yo’ self mindset was intoxicating. It felt like I was having a bubble bath with a nice glass of wine every time I swiped my little piece of plastic. I swore I could feel the release of endorphins every time I purchased something.
Soon, I went from eating out lavishly to shopping. I figured that if I was going to spend the money, I might as well be able to look in my closet and see the fruits of my labor. This is where my love affair with clothing and fashion began. I wanted to change my closet up and I took full advantage. As far as I was concerned, I was just getting an early start to the rest of the way I wanted to live my life.
This was also the time that I got my first credit card. It was a Discover because I had very little credit as a college student. At first it was only used for emergencies, but as money dwindled my credit card became my security blanket – always there to catch my newest purchase.
This brings me to the present day. After a tough last two years and a job transition, I was forced to dip into my 401k just to keep afloat. I’m not alone. African Americans are three times more likely to tap into their 401k or retirement plans to meet immediate financial needs.
Currently, I have six credit cards, three of which were attained in the last two years. They range from my old, faithful Discover to a furniture store card, two additional credit cards and two more store cards. My debt has ballooned from a minuscule few hundred dollars to a staggering $15,000+, not including my student loans. My debt has become my dirty little secret.
Now that I’m 25 and wanting to expand educationally, professionally and personally, I find my debt holding me back. Around 72% of black women are the main breadwinners in their households. That’s why I feel now that it is more crucial than ever to get my financial life right, especially if I want to have a family one day.
My current financial situation is preventing me from pursuing my dream of buying and renovating a house, from investing and preparing from the future and stopping me from traveling. I see more and more every day that financial literacy is not just useful but is critical.
I’ve become a member of various financial literacy programs focused on making knowledge and information about budgeting and saving accessible and mainstream. Still, I struggle daily with making positive choices to ensure my financial future. I know that, because this lifestyle habit took years to develop it will also take years to change.
On Saturday domestic gas and electricity supplier GB Energy announced it was ceasing to trade. The move leaves 160,000 customers in limbo. What happens next for them – and rest of us
None of the small “challenger” energy firms that supply gas and electricity actually produce it – instead they buy it on the wholesale market, add a margin, and sell it on to customers, usually via one of the price comparison websites.
Since launching three years ago, GB Energy had been offering some of the cheapest tariffs in order to grab market share. It gathered 160,000 customers relatively quickly.
The problem is that the management were caught out by wholesale prices rises. The company, which Guardian Money had expressed reservations about this time last year, was not forward-buying enough of its energy and was therefore vulnerable to wholesale price rises. Ultimately, it was probably supplying energy to some households for less that it was paying its suppliers.
Many in the industry have been predicting that a small supplier would go bust in exactly this way. It remains to be seen whether any other small suppliers with similar business models will follow suit.
What happens if I am a GB Energy customer?
Nothing yet – your lights and central heating will continue to come on as if nothing had happened. Behind the scenes, the energy regulator Ofgem is currently in negotiations to appoint what is known as a “supplier of last resort”, a company to which all GB Energy’s customers will be moved en-mass, probably sometime next week.
Last month the regulator rather fortuitously announced it had put in place a safety net to guarantee that any customer who had built up a big credit balance with their supplier won’t lose out.
Domestic energy customers can often be hundreds of pounds in credit at this time of the year, ahead of the peak winter usage period when bills are much higher. Ofgem is looking to appoint a supplier that will in effect honour any credit that GB Energy customers have built up – in return for effectively scooping 160,000 customers.
This looks a tall order given the liability – if half its customers were £300 in credit this equates to £24m. If no supplier will take on the liability, then a levy will be placed on all suppliers to fund this sum, equal to around £1 a household.
Affected GB Energy customers who have not yet taken meter readings should do so. Ofgem will manage the transfer behind the scenes, and has confirmed that no customer will lose out as a result of this.
Almost certainly. The deal to which GB customers will be moved is unlikely to be one of the cheapest on the market. Most likely it will be on the chosen energy supplier’s standard tariff, which typically cost around £1,100 a year for average consumption – around £250 a year more than the cheapest deals out there.
There is nothing to stop customers then moving supplier from Ofgem’s chosen firm, but the advice is to wait until the “last resort” switch has taken place, particularly if you have a credit balance as you could lose that by switching directly now.
I’m with a small supplier – is mine at risk?
It could be. The challenger suppliers do well when wholesale prices fall, but struggle when the opposite happens. The last supplier to go bust was Energy4Business, which collapsed in 2008. In the past few years wholesales prices have been on the side of the small suppliers, but over the past 12 months they have gone up around 50%, albeit from a very low base, and there will be some very nervous finance directors at a number of smaller suppliers this morning.
Seasoned industry expert Doug Stewart, who runs supplier Green Energy UK, says he fears the collapse could be the first of many, if there is a harsh winter. “The closure of GB Energy is as a result of loss-making tariffs coming home to roost. You can’t make losses without having cash to cover them, and when that cash is coming from upfront payments made by customers, the whole pack of cards comes tumbling down when growth slows or stops. There’s nothing left in the bank to pay the creditors, and the customers’ money is all gone,” he says.
Technically there is no reason to avoid the challenger suppliers, as if yours goes bust, you as a consumer won’t lose out. That said, lots of switching households will be even less keen now to switch to a firm they have never heard of. The cheapest current average dual fuel deals cost around £850, but few buyers will have heard of the suppliers.
With the cheapest big six supplier tariffs now costing around £880-£890, many buyers will decide that the extra cost of moving to an established firm could be worth paying.
Tens of millions of workers under the age of 55 could be affected by changes to pension age sooner than previously planned, according to a former minister.
Steve Webb, pensions minister in the coalition government between 2010-15, says documents produced by the Department of Work and Pensions suggest the government is preparing a “more aggressive” timetable on state pension age changes.
We have been following the conversation you’ve been having in the comments. Here’s a roundup of your views – you can click on the links below to expand the discussion or to get involved yourself.
Share your views at the original article, here.
It is a sad fact of office life that the high point of the working day, second only to the utterly glorious bit where you get to go home, is lunch. Somehow a morning of meetings and pointless paperwork can seem almost worth it for a few minutes alone with your Tupperware, quietly going through your ex’s tasteless wedding photos – until a box of fried chicken or a Lean Cuisine curry wafts past, spoiling your gastronomic moment with the all-pervading scent of complete and unabashed rudeness. Eating smelly food at your desk is tantamount to sticking two greasy fingers up at your co-workers – and then wiping them clean on their mouse mats.
Two-thirds of Britons now eat our lunches “al desko” (a phrase that makes this statistic all the more depressing, somehow) most days of the week and, according to a recent survey for the interior landscaping firm Ambius (which may, I suspect, have an interest in redesigning our working environment), half of office workers judge colleagues who choose particularly aromatic food as antisocial. It’s hard not to see this as having a negative effect on productivity – if you’re still boiling with rage at someone for that sardine curry, you’re hardly going to bust a gut to meet their sales targets for the afternoon, or go the extra mile to help them out on an urgent project.
Caroline Craig and Sophie Missing, authors of the definitive guide to the office feast, the Little Book of Lunch, agree smelly food is a problem: “In every office, there is always at least one employee who flouts the staffroom etiquette and microwaves something so pungent, it permeates the whole building’s vents for hours.” However, they acknowledge that sometimes smelly packed lunches are unavoidable – “so if you’ve got smoked haddock chowder to heat up, then for God’s sake do it quickly, then eat it outside on a park bench”.
Not all foods are created equally offensive, of course; hot food smells more strongly, and smelly food that you can hear being slurped or crunched supplies a double whammy of queasy irritation. So where does your lunch come in the hierarachy of shame?
The worst. Even if you close your eyes and breathe through your mouth, you can still hear this lot being consumed through the simmering sound of your own rage. Enjoy only if you’re planning to resign in the next half hour: onion soup (slurp), cheesy chilli nachos (crunch), instant noodles (ugh), garlic bread (basically a P45 in baguette form).
Heat causes molecules in food to move around faster, which means more of them will reach your nose. Best consumed outside in a wide open space: curry of any variety, any brassicas (school dinner alert), fast food, fish, particularly oily fish such as kippers, which could land you in a tribunal.
Enjoy with the window wide open, and only if your deskmate is listening to loud metal over headphones: cheese and onion crisps, crusty tuna rolls, any hipster sandwiches containing kimchi.
Best saved for when the rest of your team has popped to the shops: tuna salad, ripe brie sandwiches, hard-boiled eggs, tinned fish.
Eat when your deskmate is busy on the phone: apples, carrot sticks, ready-salted crisps, nuts, crunchy salads.
Eat as much as you like, when you like: chocolate bars, yoghurt, cucumber sandwiches.
Huge numbers of VAT fraudsters are illegally selling goods tax-free to British shoppers on Amazon and eBay this Christmas, despite new government efforts to crack down on this ballooning £1bn VAT evasion crisis.
A Guardian investigation found a wide variety of popular goods being illegally sold without VAT on Britain’s leading shopping sites. They range from cheap Christmas tree lights, electric toothbrushes and thermal socks to expensive laptops, iPads, music keyboards, violins and pingpong tables.
In some cases, VAT fraudsters offer unbeatable prices. Mostly, however, their prices remain in line with law-abiding competitors and the proceeds of evasion disappear overseas, often to China.
Guardian investigations found many tax-evading sellers were trading without displaying VAT numbers on Amazon or eBay. Others were showing made up numbers, or numbers cloned, without authorisation, from unsuspecting legitimate businesses.
Several sellers purported to be operating through UK trading companies, but checks showed these firms had been dissolved, sometimes years earlier. None responded to questions about VAT.
HMRC estimates the explosion in VAT fraud on Britain’s shopping websites will cost £1bn to £1.5bn in lost VAT revenues this year, with much of it going missing in the current festive period.
By the end of “Cyber Monday”. UK shoppers will have spent £6.77bn on the web in a seven-day shopping binge that peaked on Black Friday, according to online retail association IMRG. The number of parcels ordered online will be up 12% on last year, it estimates.
The market for many goods is now dominated by overseas sellers. On eBay, for example, 40% of UK sales of Android phones are to firms registered in China. Meanwhile, Chinese-based companies account for more than 60% of sales of Christmas tree fairy lights on eBay.co.uk.
There is no suggestion that Amazon or eBay have themselves evaded tax, but critics claim they could make some basic changes – such as requiring sellers to display valid VAT numbers – that would help to stop their websites being used by many overseas companies as a platform for industrial-scale fraud.
Both eBay and Amazon insist that it is not their responsibility to police tax compliance among sellers. VAT rules are complex but the tax generally applies to most goods supplied from locations in the UK even if the seller company is incorporated overseas. Shoppers typically see prices that include VAT, charged on most goods at the standard rate of 20%.
Amazon told the Guardian: “Marketplace sellers are independent businesses responsible for complying with their own VAT obligations.” It added that Amazon does offer tools sellers can use to help with tax compliance, but “we don’t have the authority to review their tax affairs”.
EBay said it would pass information from the Guardian’s investigation to HMRC: “If we are informed by HMRC that a seller is not complying with requirements then we will take appropriate action.” A spokesperson said eBay “continually reminds” sellers of their need to comply with the law and had recently warned overseas firms of the UK government’s efforts to deal with VAT fraud.
After the Guardian first highlighted rife VAT evasion on online shopping sites, HMRC launched a series of warehouse raids, seizing £500,000 of goods. Months later, the then chancellor George Osborne gave tax inspectors new powers which he said demonstrated “firm action to protect the UK market from unfair online competition [from overseas VAT evaders]”.
Under the new rules, HMRC now has the power to issue Amazon and eBay with warning notices about suspected VAT fraudsters using their sites. If they then fail to take action, Amazon and eBay can be held liable for any VAT that later goes missing.
In reality, however, these changes have had little impact and VAT evasion remains widespread. A spokesperson for VATfraud.org, a campaign group set up by UK-based sellers, said: “Despite the new laws, HMRC have shown a woeful lack of action. There are many fraudsters who were reported to HMRC years ago but are still trading, and evading VAT, today.”
Guardian investigations found Amazon even offering extensive support services at its British warehouses to overseas sellers that were doing little to mask their VAT evasion.
As well as advertising these sellers’ goods on Amazon.co.uk, it holds items in Amazon UK warehouses, arranges delivery to addresses across Britain, and deals with complaints and returned goods.
Amazon warehouse staff even offer gift-wrapping services on behalf of the fraudster sellers.
There is no suggestion Amazon or eBay knowingly facilitate specific fraudulent VAT-free sales, but the two US groups are nevertheless well aware that evasion in online shopping is a major problem.
Meanwhile, the sellers themselves are often based overseas, with little or nothing known about their UK sales activities by HMRC.
One such seller, a company based in Dubai, offered an iPad Air 2 for sale on Amazon.co.uk.
The iPad was sold at £456.68, which was a similar price to that on offer at Apple’s own online store. However, the Apple store price included a £78.17 VAT charge while the Dubai-based Amazon seller charged no VAT at all.
Asked for a VAT receipt, the iPad seller said in an email: “We don’t supply UK VAT receipt, sorry.”
Many sellers contacted by the Guardian were similarly open about not charging VAT. “Thank you for your letter and sorry to tell you we do not have UK VAT receipt. We are located in China,” said one. “Our VAT is still in the application,” said another.
A third seller even offered to cut a deal, offering to share part of the proceeds of the VAT fraud. “If you want the VAT receipt, it will be after your purchase a week later. Otherwise, we will offer some discount to you directly,” the seller said in an email. “Looking forward to your reply.”
A former director of an NHS trust is suing Jeremy Hunt for religious discrimination after he was effectively barred from applying for positions following his public opposition to gay adoption.
Richard Page has lodged a claim at the employment tribunal, saying his televised comments in 2015 that it was in the best interests of a child to have a mother and father stemmed from his Christian faith.
His remarks led to him being sacked as a magistrate in March for serious misconduct, after 15 years on the bench. Two years earlier, the lord chancellor and lord chief justice reprimanded Page after finding his religious beliefs, rather than evidence, had influenced his decisions during a family court hearing.
Page, 70, was also a non-executive director at the Kent and Medway NHS and social care partnership trust. In March, following a complaint by the trust’s LGBT staff network, Page was suspended for the final three months of his four-year term in office.
In August, the NHS Termination of Appointments Panel told Page “it was not in the interests of the health service for you to serve as a non-executive director in the NHS”, in effect barring him from applying for directorships in the future.
Page, a former NHS manager from Headcorn, Kent, is bringing a claim against the health secretary and NHS Improvement, which has the power to appoint non-executive directors. He is pursuing a similar case against the lord chancellor over his sacking as a magistrate.
In a TV debate on Christians in public life in March 2015, Page said: “My responsibility as a magistrate, as I saw it, was to do what I considered best for the child, and my feeling was therefore that it would be better if it was a man and woman who were the adopted parents.”
In a video on the website of Christian Concern, which is backing his case, Page denied he was homophobic and claimed that more than 6,500 emails had been sent to the Kent NHS trust in his support against one complaint “from the LGBT people”.
He said: “This is the second public sector organisation that has got rid of me. This, I feel, is completely wrong because it’s discriminatory against my opinions and the fact I was doing what I considered to be right.
“The political correctness makes people be frightened, or makes them think they’re the only ones that believe this way, and yet they obviously are the majority … There are people standing up against the so-called politically correct views.”
Andrea Minichiello Williams, of Christian Concern, said freedoms in the UK were being “catastrophically eroded by political correctness and fear”.
“The comment that a child needs a mother and a father is a belief held by Christians, and many others around the world. Everything that Richard Page does, his whole belief system is rooted in his Christian faith. Beliefs arising from the Christian faith continue to be lawful beliefs in our country.”
She said government assurances that equality legislation would not lead to the removal of people who expressed Christian views while holding public positions had turned out to be baseless.
“If it is possible to suffer the detriment of losing your position at work for expressing lawful Christian views, the situation is crucial. There is, in effect, a religious bar to office for Christians solely; those politically correct institutions would not do the same to other faiths.”
A spokesperson for NHS Improvement said: “We are unable to comment on ongoing court cases.”
The ‘challenger’ energy firm had 160,000 customers, many of whom are in credit. Here’s the lowdown
There is a popular misconception that becoming a landlord is purely a monetary decision, complemented by the myth that the only task involved is counting the never-ending flow of money, then deciding how to spend or hoard it. My decision to move into this profession was driven by a number of factors, none of which related to it being a supposedly lucrative occupation.
I bailed out of the business world at the relatively young age of 30 after one too many conflicts, my fiery temperament and straight-talking approach ruffling more than a few feathers. However, each job move during my short and turbulent career had created a small pot of severance pay and in the pre-bubble days of the London property market this was sufficient to put down a deposit each time and build up a small portfolio.
Working for myself, managing a portfolio without the need to consult others and play politics, turned out to be much better suited to my personality. I like the challenge of being CEO, marketing director, construction manager, interior designer, concierge, and yes, general dogsbody, all at once. It’s simplistic to look at the wealth I have created and think I have ruthlessly accumulated without consideration for others. But with no pension to speak of and the desire to provide for my children, I am proud to have this business to safeguard our futures.
However, the real passion that inspired me to enter a business that is much tougher than most imagine, is a love of period properties. I have no idea where it came from, but the moment I see a house with intricate mouldings, parquet floors or other character features, my heart starts to race just thinking about how it could look once restored. Typically, a single project takes 18 months from start to finish – and many, many sleepless nights.
Inspiring as it has been to have an interesting niche, the day-to-day work is often highly repetitive, with all too frequent peaks of stress. For every hour consumed with choosing a new sofa, vintage rug, or flicking through an interior design magazine, there are 30 spent dealing with an endless stream of leaking showers, malfunctioning boilers, blocked gutters, not to mention moaning tenants, reluctant builders, arrogant architects and tedious government regulations. Invariably, a crisis appears in the most inopportune moments – there is rarely such a thing as a weekend off.
It is understandable to see tenants as powerless victims, subject to the whims of their landlord’s commercial agenda, but it can and does cut both ways. Most tenants are genuinely decent people and simply want a nice place to live, but as in all walks of life some are capricious, irresponsible and even blatantly dishonest.
Illegal sub-lettings are a constant bane. Serious maintenance problems have built up over months then are casually mentioned in passing in a belated monosyllabic communication. In 25 years I can count on one hand the number of times a tenant has confessed willingly to property damage and offered to pay or fix it. Many wish to instantly break contracts when it is no longer convenient for them to live there.
A tenant’s failure to pay rent is usually a rare occurrence, but when it does happen it’s crucial to treat the problem sensitively rather than instantly reach for the lawyer’s phone number. There is often a personal or economic problem causing the arrears and once this is understood a solution can usually be found. One tenant who had been renting from me for five years lost their job and started drinking heavily. I found out that they had borrowed substantially to finance several months’ rent while out of work. The situation could not go on. We chatted extensively and through a combination of a rent moratorium, shortening of the contract and the promise of an excellent reference, an amicable solution was found.
It would be hypocritical of me not to sometimes feel a twinge of guilt owning numerous properties while a younger generation struggles to get their foot on the ladder. However, building up the portfolio has been my life’s work and I have poured a huge amount of time, energy, passion and money into it – a process which never stops. A vibrant city economy such as London needs a good quality stock of rental properties to meet its citizens’ frequently changing circumstances. It does frustrate me hugely reading about “slum” landlords with their ruthless commercial practices, or speculative buy-to-let investors gobbling up soulless new builds furnished with cheap cookie-cutter interiors for maximum commercial gain. I have to accept that it is part of the business I am in to be tarred with the same brush.
Controversial as Airbnb and its counterparts are, they are a game-changer that is here to stay. I branched out into more short-term arrangements three years ago. Even the best long-term tenant gets a little jaded after a while in the treatment of your properties, so it has been a breath of fresh air dealing with guests who are genuinely thrilled to rent from your portfolio. The other plus is that with shorter rental periods, the bad guests usually leave before they have time to do much damage.
Such short-term lets have been criticised as some kind of cash cow but the amount of work involved in even a single rental is breathtaking. The property maintenance and cleaning has to compete with a five-star hotel and you are in constant touch with guests at all times of the day and night. Fail in any of this and your rating plummets and the property will sink without trace on the listings. You habitually feel like an insecure, over-sensitive actor as you pore over the latest review.
It has also created interesting new scenarios with some bookings not quite what they seem. With the elegant period-style interiors I utilise, the temptation to rent them for more salubrious motives is too much for some guests. One of my first bookings comprised of five guests doing a photoshoot for a magazine. Although I politely requested “no porn” prior to booking, a pretty model proceeded to run around the patio of the building wearing only lingerie, to the delight of the elderly residents.
Others have surreptitiously used my properties for commercial purposes, paying a fraction of the commercial rate of an official location. It is a cat-and-mouse game trying to spot them. However the majority of guests are lovely and have allowed me to recover a sense of pride in what I do, given all the negative publicity frequently surrounding landlords. The schadenfreude from giving overpriced, bland corporate hotel chains a kick in the teeth is an added plus.
As I sit in my home office at 7am and deal with a leaking shower tray in an Edwardian house for the eighth time in nine years, it is easy to fantasise about a profession with less daily drudgery and more stability. It can also be wearying being responsible for the accommodation for typically 20 people every day and night, 365 days of the year. But as a new booking comes in from Beijing or Berlin, or the photos arrive from a recently executed renovation, a surge of adrenalin kicks in and I am ready to face the day’s challenges.
• Are you a zero-hours worker, a novelist, or a Father Christmas impersonator? We want to hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your story anonymously here
A couple of years ago my husband and I were travelling in south-east Asia, and a Filipino family welcomed us into their humble home and we had an amazing time getting to know them.
Fast forward to last month and I’d sent the children a large parcel of books, toys, art supplies and clothes, worth around £100. I used Parcel Monkey – big mistake! The parcel arrived in the country, but the courier then sent an email to say there was a customs charge and the item would be returned to the UK in three days unless paid. It couldn’t tell me how much it was, so I asked them not to return it while I sorted out any payment due. I emailed the family who said the charge was around £20, which they couldn’t afford, so I immediately sent them the money via Western Union.
When they went to pay, however, the parcel had already been sent back to the UK. Parcel Monkey is refusing to resend the item or refund me the £101.02 it cost to send in the first place. It was a gift for people who are very poor and were so looking forward to it.
Parcel Monkey did not respond to my message about holding the parcel, while its online support is a joke and each time someone different fobs me off. AW, Colchester, Essex
Parcel Monkey is an agency, meaning its business model involves sub-contracting out to local courier companies – customers are invited to choose which one – but over which it has no direct control. Delays with customs, meawhile, can extend predicted deadlines.
The company confirmed that the return of the parcel to the UK was due to unpaid customs duty in the Philippines. DHL (the actual courier company) attempted collection of the duty, but as this was refused by the receiver the item was returned.
A Parcel Monkey spokesman said that both it and DHL had acted in good faith, but he understood why you felt frustrated by events “beyond our control”. He went on: “We, or the carrier selected by our customers, do not have control over international customs and if the time frames are not met, items will be returned. I can confirm that we will return the item back to AW at our own expense as a gesture of goodwill.”
Thankfully this happened, and you reshipped the item directly with DHL.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Alex spent £675 on a washing machine and a fridge-freezer from Littlewoods, opting to “buy now pay later”. At the time his income was sufficient to make the repayments before the end of the interest-free period, but when he was suddenly made redundant he couldn’t afford to repay the debt in time, and then an interest rate of 39% kicked in.
“Suddenly the payments went up from about £130 to £250 a month and I didn’t have the cash,” he says. “Buy now pay later seemed the easy option, but looking back I should have just saved up the money for a couple of months. It was naivety on my part.”
Alex sought advice from debt charity StepChange, and with its help reached an agreement with Littlewoods. In total he repaid £1,130, nearly twice the amount he borrowed. “I will never have a catalogue debt again,” he says, “If I want something I’ll save up for it.”
Alex’s difficulties were compounded by the fact that interest rates on goods bought from catalogues tend to be higher than those on mainstream credit. At this time of year it can be tempting to use these firms to buy Christmas gifts, but finance experts warn that if you’re not going to pay off your borrowing quickly, you could end up paying a high price.
Traditional catalogues such as Freemans and Littlewoods have been around for decades. They allowed customers to shop at home and spread the cost with a range of payment options. The rise of the internet means these brands now operate online, and have been joined by a host of catalogue-style firms selling clothes, gadgets, gifts and furniture.
The catalogue companies typically offer customers incentives to open “personal accounts” with a discount off their first order or free delivery. Account holders are then offered various options to spread the cost of their purchases. Recently, comparison website Money.co.uk described the cost of catalogue credit from some suppliers as “clear as mud”. It warned that in some cases catalogues were charging three times the typical credit card APR of 22.8%.
Among the biggest firms, Very.co.uk charges a typical interest rate of 39.9%; JD Williams (which owns Jacamo, SimplyBe, Fifty Plus, and others) 58.7%; Studio 48.9%; Look Again (owners of Kaleidoscope, Witt International and Curvissa) 34.9%; and Argos 29.9%.
“Buy now pay later”, or BNPL, is a common option. Borrowers who pay the entire bill within the stipulated timescale, normally three, six or 12 months, pay no interest at all. Managed well, this can be a great way to borrow. But if your personal circumstances change and you run into problems, or you just miss a payment, it can cost you dear. If you fail to pay off your borrowing in time the interest is usually backdated to day one – not the date the interest-free period ended.
Headteacher Jacquie Sainsbury recently learned this the hard way. She has been a Very customer for five years, always making her repayments before interest kicked in. However, when she recently attempted to settle a £1,621 balance a power cut meant her debit card payment wasn’t processed and she missed the deadline. Very charges a typical APR of 39.9%, and interest at this rate – £644 – was applied to her account. She asked Very for leniency given that she had tried to make the payment, but the matter is yet to be resolved.
A spokesperson for Shop Direct, which owns Very, says: “Our BNPL options, at terms of six, nine or 12 months, allow customers to budget by making payments of any amount at any time to suit them, and avoid interest by paying the full cash price of the item before the end of the BNPL period. The APRs we offer are competitive, and are based on customers’ individual circumstances and their credit risk profiles.”
Very also offers “low monthly payments” as an option, allowing customers to “take as long as they like” by paying the minimum each month: £5 or 7% of their account balance. But a customer doing this would take five-and-half years to repay a £500 debt, paying £314 in interest in the process. Paying £100 a month instead of the minimum would mean the debt was repaid in six months, with an interest bill of £48.
In comparison, if you borrowed £500 on a mainstream credit card charging 18.29% and repaid £100 a month, you’d pay just £23 in interest over six months.
Jane Tully, director of external affairs at the Money Advice Trust, says the wording “take as long as you like” sends entirely the wrong message. “It could lead to customers paying a large amount of interest, even on a relatively small debt. This language should be changed as a matter of urgency.”
The trust is one of several debt charities warning about the high cost of catalogue debt. Its research shows an estimated 1.9 million people used catalogue credit to buy Christmas presents in 2015. About one in 10 callers to the National Debtline, the charity’s free advice service, have problems with catalogue debt.
Shop Direct also owns Littlewoods. Its customers can “spread the cost” with at least 20 weeks’ interest-free borrowing. After that interest kicks in, although the Littlewoods website doesn’t display the representative rate. A spokesperson told The Observer that the rate depends on the individual customer’s circumstances, but that only a minority choose to arrange their repayments so that they attract interest. “The majority pay the full cash price before the interest opt-out period is over. The most common rate of interest for those that do pay interest on BNPL transactions is 44.9%.”
Grattan was the only company The Observer came across that provided a worked example of the cost implications of not repaying a BNPL deal in time. It states: “Failure to pay a £200 debt in 12 months incurs an interest charge of £60.69, and the new balance of £260.69 then incurs interest at a typical rate of 34.9% until repaid.”
Andrew Hagger of financial website MoneyComms says many people wouldn’t buy things from catalogues if they were aware of the potential cost. “Because the interest charges are applied over multiple weeks or months, the customer loses track of how much they are actually paying back,” he says. “Much like payday loans and credit builder-type credit cards, the interest rates are high because the default rates and non-payment issues are more common than with mainstream credit.”
StepChange says 36% of its clients have catalogue debt, with the average amount owed standing at more than £2,000 – and rising. “Catalogue credit can be an extremely expensive way to shop if people cannot afford to pay it off quickly or they miss payments,” says spokesman Edward Ware. “People need to think carefully about whether credit is the right option for their shopping, before searching for the best deal and deciding whether they can afford to pay off the balance before interest starts to mount up.”
If you fall behind on catalogue repayments, don’t stick your head in the sand. It’s vital to get in touch with your creditors and explain your situation. A debt adviser can help you work out a payment based on a pro-rata distribution of your available income – this means you offer all your creditors a fair share of what you can afford to pay. You can also ask for any interest and charges to be frozen.
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I work as a European grants manager. My position, although probably OK for the next couple of years, doesn’t have a future in post-Brexit Britain. To add to this, I don’t particularly enjoy the job and it isn’t a career I would have chosen. I did an arts degree and took temping work in the public sector to pay the bills alongside the unpaid or poorly paid work I was doing for a small theatre company.
Nearly 10 years later, I feel stuck in this line of work but my field is drying up fast and will probably end as our ties with the EU are severed. Along the way, I have had experience in project management, financial planning, communication, training, events and marketing, but transferable skills seem to be a thing of the past and the creative sector I long to work in seems to be a tightly guarded door.
Taking a pay cut isn’t viable with my current mortgage payments and although I have looked into getting some career coaching, the costs are out of my reach and the results seem to be hit and miss.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally. 
Rail passengers could be given a boost under government plans to make it clearer which is the cheapest ticket option available to them.
Ministers are planning an overhaul of the complex train ticketing system, under which many passengers end up paying more than is necessary for their travel. It is understood that rail firms face being ordered to redesign thousands of station ticket machines as part of the measures, which are due to be announced next month.
“Rail passengers must be able to trust that they are getting the best possible deal every time they travel and we are working with industry partners and consumer experts to identify improvements which could be brought in quickly across the network,” said the Department for Transport (DfT).
“We want a simpler, more modern and passenger-focused fares and ticketing system which takes advantage of all the benefits of new technology. Progress has been made, including an announcement earlier this week of £80m to accelerate the roll-out of smart ticketing across the network.”
It is understood that ministers are considering forcing rail operators to alert passengers who are using station ticket machines or buying from the ticket office if there is a cheaper way to make their journey.
Under the ticketing settlement agreement of 1995, train operators are only obliged to tell customers of the most suitable ticket for their journey.
A source indicated that the government was believed to be planning to order firms to be more consistent on conditions, such as peak time restrictions, attached to tickets.
According to the Times, passengers travelling between London and Birmingham are offered more than 40 different fares and there are an estimated 16m different train fares available on the UK’s rail network.
The paper reported that different self-service machines inside the same train station offer vastly different fares for the same journey, meaning some passengers end up paying more.
Stephen Joseph, executive director of the Campaign for Better Transport, told the paper: “There are 16m fares on the national rail database … anything that makes the system more transparent is very welcome, but this must go further and look at the real fundamentals of the ticketing system.”
A spokesman for the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators, said: “We want rail customers to get the best possible deal every time. We’re making it easier and quicker for people to pay to travel by train with smarter ticketing, and we want to speed up improvements that will mean simpler, clearer fares that people can trust.”
The government may be preparing to increase the official state pension age to 70 for millions of people currently in their 20s, a former minister has claimed.
Steve Webb said documents produced by the Department for Work and Pensions suggested a “more aggressive” timetable on state pension age (SPA) increases than previously planned was being prepared. 
This could affect tens of millions of workers aged under 55, and bring a pension age of 70 into the official timetable for the first time for people currently aged between 22 and 30, he added. The current official SPA for people in their 20s is 68, though under the existing schedule it could be expected to rise to 69.
The SPA is the earliest age someone can start receiving their state pension, and is due to rise to 66 between 2018 and 2020, to 67 between 2026 and 2028, and then to 68 between 2044 and 2046.
An official review is taking place into the future of the state pension, and on 16 November the DWP asked the Government Actuary’s Department (GAD) to look at projected life expectancy in future years. It wants the department to set out a schedule for SPA increases, assuming the government sticks to its previously-announced policy that people should spend two-thirds of their adult life in work and one third (33.3%) in retirement.
But the DWP also requested figures for people spending 32% of their adult life in retirement. The DWP said this “reflects the experiences of those reaching state pension age over the last 20 years”, but Webb said this failed to take account of more recent improvements in longevity. He said that asking for figures based on 32% was an “unexpected move”.
The move pushes out the age at which the SPA can be paid out, according to analysts by pension consultancy firm Willis Towers Watson.
Webb, a former pensions minister who is now director of policy at mutual insurer Royal London, said: “The previous policy strikes a fair balance between expecting people to work longer and allowing people to enjoy a decent retirement.”
“If the government is planning to force tens of millions of people to work to 68, 69 or even 70, then it should be transparent about its plans. This would be a huge shift and should be properly debated, not buried in a technical document seen only by specialists,” said Webb.
Willis Towers Watson looked at what switching from the existing 33.3% formula to 32% would mean for the SPA, using official life expectancy projections. It said people born between March 1962 and April 1972 would see their pension age rise from 67 now to 68. Meanwhile, those born between March 1973 and April 1985 would have a pension age of 69 rather than the present 68. Those born between March 1986 and April 1994 would see their SPA rise from an assumed 69 to 70.
A DWP spokesperson said: “This work forms part of our research ahead of the first state pension age review. It’s important we have a clear understanding of how the current system is working for pensioners before we undertake the review.”
Willis Towers Watson said that if the decision had to be about how to take money off the public rather than whether to do so, “later retirement may appear more palatable than higher tax rates for (often) the same people”.
It added: “Later working can boost economic output and tax revenues, too. There was barely a squeak of protest when the government announced that the SPA would reach 67 in 2028.”
Possible future changes to state pension entitlements were hinted at by the chancellor, Philip Hammond, in his autumn statement when he said: “As we look ahead to the next parliament, we will need to ensure we tackle the challenges of rising longevity and fiscal sustainability.”
There are also fears that the government will water down the state pension “triple lock”, which means that the payments rise in line which ever is the highest of average wages, inflation, or 2.5%. Damian Green, the minister responsible for pensions, did not guarantee this mechanism would remain during an interview on ITV’s Preston on Sunday, saying it was “premature” to decide on its future. “We’ll need to see what happens to the economy between now and 2020, apart from anything else,” Green said.
The boss of the Institute of Directors will on Monday warn top bosses that the vote for Brexit and the election of Donald Trump will result in greater scrutiny of boardroom behaviour and executive pay.
Simon Walker will tell an audience in London it would be foolish for senior executives to attempt to defend high pay and that, unless they can show they are listening to public concern, the government will do it for them by clamping down on excess.
“Unless boards show that they are listening, and responding, to the mood of the times, the government’s trigger finger will just get itchier and itchier,” he will say.
“At this point the need for change is a pragmatic, even more than a moral one. I am not talking about hand-wringing or words of contrition, I am talking about corporate awareness actually tempering remuneration decisions.”
The speech to the High Pay Centre – in which he will highlight the rise of “superstar CEOs” – comes as Theresa May’s government prepares to publish a green paper on corporate governance, which was one of her key speeches in her successful campaign to become Conservative leader in the wake of the Brexit vote.
The pay of FTSE 100 bosses has rocketed from an average of £1m in 1998 to £4.3m in 2015, far outstripping growth in average pay.
Last week, the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) thinktank issued a warning that workers in Britain face the longest squeeze on their earnings for 70 years. The IFS calculated that by 2021, real wages in the UK – pay adjusted for inflation – will still not have recovered to their 2008 level, before the global financial crisis hit.
Walker is expected to say: “After Brexit and Trump, business should expect a new level of scrutiny and questioning of their role in society. It would be foolish now for companies to close ranks and defend the high pay status quo.
“How they react on that issue may prove to be the litmus test for the relationship between business and government over the next few, rather bumpy, years.
“The seeming inevitability of executive pay rises at listed companies, especially when general wage growth remains stubbornly slow is, I think, central to public discontent.”
As he prepares to leave the IoD at the end of this year, Walker will set out two issues that, in his view, need to be addressed – “the steady ratchet” of pay and superstar CEOs.
“The growth of the superstar CEO has been fuelled by the desire of boards to believe that their problems can be solved by a rare and magical leader. Paying top dollar becomes proof you have the very best,” he will say.
He is expected to point to the £14m pay deal for Bob Dudley, chief executive at BP, which was voted down at this year’s annual shareholder meeting in April.
He will describe Sir Martin Sorrell – chief executive of WPP – as “the ultimate superstar CEO”. Sorrell received more than £70m in shares and cash for 2015.
“I wonder at this point what function the money really plays: I think it is largely a signifier that he is the best in the business,” Walker will say.
He is also likely to warn about the impact of regulation on the sector: “Publication of directors’ pay was originally introduced to shame companies into moderation, but it has had the opposite effect.
“Firms have been drawn into competition with each other, and at the top end, pay has become a status symbol.”
Amid calls to publish the pay ratio – the gap between the chief executive’s pay and the average of the workforce – Walker will say: “Publishing pay ratios has been heralded as a transformative step, but we have seen the counterintuitive effect of publishing overall pay, and I’m not convinced that the data tells you all that much – is Goldman Sachs a more worthy company than Tesco because it has a lower ratio?”
The government’s green paper is expected to consult on pay ratios, the introduction of binding votes on pay and whether there should be advisory roles for employees on remuneration committees – which appears to be a step back from workers on boards.
A government source said: “The UK has led the world in corporate governance, but our strong reputation can only be maintained if government and business regularly reviews and upgrades our governance.”
Men are still paid vastly more than women across many jobs and regions despite firms “tinkering around the edges” to try to close the gap, according to a report.
Where men and women are doing the same job, they are usually paid almost the same – although men still have a slight advantage, earning an average of 1.6% more. However, the real gap is caused by the scarcity of women at the highest and best-paid levels of industries such as oil and gas, technology and life sciences.
The biggest pay gap – 34% – was in the east Midlands, followed by the south-east at 30%, the north-east at 28% and the West Midlands at 26%.
The study, conducted by the business advice group Korn Ferry Hay and based on research into about 500,000 UK workers, found that firms were offering incentives such as flexible working instead of tackling the problem head on.
Ben Frost, a pay data specialist at Korn Ferry Hay, said the figures showed that overall across the UK men were paid far more than women.
“This shows that organisations still aren’t dealing with the real issue here – which is that we need more women working in higher paying jobs and industries and at the most senior levels,” he said. “At the moment firms are tinkering around the edges by offering benefits like flexible working to address the issue. More fundamental change needs to happen.”
On Friday the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, challenged all Greater London Authority bodies to publish action plans to tackle the problem. He released figures showing a gender pay gap of 11.6% in the Metropolitan police, 19.2% in Transport for London and 35% in the post-Olympics London Legacy Development Corporation.
Khan made closing the pay gap in the capital, where his mother once stitched dresses for 50p apiece, one of the planks of his election manifesto earlier this year.
In July he published the first City Hall pay audit, which showed that women made up more than half of all employees, but less than a third of those earning more than £100,000.
Women in the UK have in effect been working for free since 10 November, which the Fawcett Society calculated to be Equal Pay Day for 2016. On average, women effectively stopped earning 51 days before the end of the year, relative to men.
Campaigners say the gap will take 60 years to close at the current rate of progress.
The Fawcett Society’s chief executive, Sam Smethers, said: “A root cause of the gender pay gap is that we don’t value the work done by women ... We are focusing on the fundamental question of who and what we value and asking why it is that we don’t value women and the work they do – paid or unpaid.”
When Andrew Hegerty started investigating how automation could improve his engineering business in Mackay seven months ago, a few eyebrows were raised.
Various economists predict automation is on the cusp of destroying millions of Australian jobs and Hegerty’s was a labour-intensive workplace.
For Hegerty, fear has been replaced by a belief that automation not only holds the key to long-term survival but it can create better jobs than those replaced.
More to the point, he says there is simply no choice – businesses like his can embrace automation or disappear. “I believe that automation will be the cornerstone of our business within the next five years,” he says. “Manual fabrication will become the exception rather than the rule.”
Hegerty’s company, the Mackay-based Team Group (Australia), provides engineering, fabrication, maintenance and other services to the mining industry, mainly in nearby central Queensland, but now also to some overseas clients.
North and central Queensland are exactly the sort of locations economists say could be savaged by workplace automation if the right policies are not put in place to foster innovation and skills for a new marketplace.
Examples of automation are popping up regularly in regional Australia. Driverless trucks have been operating above ground for some time, particularly in Western Australia, and now Queensland University of Technology is working with Caterpillar to develop driverless trucks that can operate in underground mines.
The Community for Economic Development of Australia released a report last year that found more than 5 million current Australian jobs, or 40% of the workforce, have a moderate to high likelihood of disappearing in the next 10 to 15 years owing to technological advancements. For regional areas with a focus on mining or manufacturing, the figure is 60%.
The wording of these predictions is important. The experts say 5 million current jobs will be replaced but they do not claim that will be the total decline in Australian employment. They say there is a need to ensure those jobs can be replaced by different ones, with new skill sets.
Ceda’s chief executive officer, Prof Stephen Martin, says although mining and manufacturing jobs are most at risk from automation, the impact will spread much further, affecting jobs that involve low levels of social interaction, low levels of creativity, or low levels of mobility and dexterity.
These could include brokers, mechanics, cashiers, construction workers, accountants and real estate agents.
Computers are becoming increasingly capable in all these roles. “Our labour market will be fundamentally reshaped by the scope and breadth of technological change, and if we do not embrace massive economic reform and focus on incentivising innovation, we will simply be left behind in an increasingly competitive global marketplace,” Martin says.
This industrial revolution, like others before it, will bring the opportunity to create new and more exciting jobs – but only if the policy settings and workplace culture are in place.
Mackay is a classic example of a region with plenty at stake as automation looms on the horizon. A huge percentage of its workers are either in the mines (on drive-in-drive-out or fly-in-fly-out arrangements) or in workplaces providing services to the mining sector. The region’s employment figures have d been dented by low coal prices, forcing a degree of introspection and adaptation.
Hegerty travelled to the US to learn more about how robotics and automation could improve his workplace. What he discovered there strengthened his resolve and he says once the first mental step is taken beyond the fear of job losses.
“I think not viewing this progression as exciting is counterproductive,” he says. “With Australia’s relatively high wage rates and competition for overseas markets, if we are going to be viable as a business, it has to be for more than the price of freight [otherwise foreign competitors will take over.]”
On his US trip, Hegerty saw manufacturing businesses performing tasks with automation that his workers in Mackay were doing manually.
He also discovered that “very few” workplaces had made a successful transition with the sort of processes he would require, so there were no illusions about the difficulties ahead. “We met with representatives of the Lincoln Electric Company and their subsidiaries to discuss robotic automation for our business,” he says.
“While the technology that we were shown was mind blowing, it was the process support that we received that was the kicker of our trip.”
Not only does Hegerty believe this transition will ensure the survival of his business in a global market where productivity and competitiveness are crucial, he has also noticed enthusiasm building among his employees. They want to know what the future holds and what they can learn to be part of the process.
His belief that automation could safeguard the region’s economy, rather than destroy it, is shared by others in the city. Mackay’s deputy mayor, Amanda Camm, is chair of the council’s economic development committee and believes automation offers a “real opportunity”.
She points to the city’s status as a hub for high-skilled mining services, as well as a geographical location that will allow it to capitalise on remote operations, such as driverless machinery.
Regional hubs for mining services, such as Mackay, can create jobs from innovation, but can the same be said for the mines themselves and the smaller towns around them? Martin says there is no clear answer to that question.
He says the risk to Australian jobs is significant because if the rest of the world moves ahead of Australia the nation’s businesses will become uncompetitive. Governments must start preparing the right policies to incentivise innovation and provide retraining opportunities for workers.
Martin also says the private sector must take responsibility. “Businesses need to accept change is happening and be looking for opportunities for how they can adapt and innovate in their business to keep pace and embrace the opportunities that technological advancement brings,” he says.
“For example, technology is making it easier to tap into global supply chains and sell to a much wider customer base and that can be done from anywhere.
Martin also points out that the jobs of the future in Australia are likely to be in the service sector, a significant shift from the years of the mining boom, and this will require a “serious rethink of how we train and retrain our workforce”.
One Australian already building robotic technologies for the workplace is the Queensland University of Technology researcher Prof Peter Corke. For one of his current projects, he has developed robots to perform a task most people would assume requires the softness of a human hand – fruit picking. In this case, his robots are in active trials picking capsicums.
While a robotic picker might be expected to bruise fruit and vegetables, the technology is now so intelligent – so millimetre-perfect – it can do the job as well as or better than humans.
It is a project with obvious relevance now, as the horticulture sector grapples with the shortage and high cost of human labour.
Corke acknowledges that the development of such technology raises existential questions about employment but he is optimistic about how new, more prosperous jobs can be created to replace those lost.
He agrees that setting government policies to foster innovation industries is the key but he also throws the challenge down to Australia’s universities, claiming they must change their mindset.
“We need to encourage our PhD students to think their future isn’t to become another academic, but it’s perfectly respectable or maybe even a better option to go out and join industry, or even create an industry,” he says.
“We really need to be training our graduate students to be thinking that success doesn’t look like, ‘I’ve written a paper and someone else is reading it.’
“We need to train them to think success is, ‘I’ve got a really awesome idea, I raise some money, I start a company and employ lots of people.’”
About 160,000 UK households are to face higher energy bills in the new year after the collapse of GB Energy.
The three year-old gas and power supplier, which pulled in customers with cheaper tariffs, blamed “swift and significant increases in energy prices” for its failure. The company’s demise creates uncertainty for its account holders, but they are not at risk of being cut off as the industry regulator Ofgem is expected to have brokered a move to an alternative supplier.
“It is with regret that we are informing you that GB Energy Supply is no longer trading,” said its managing director, Luke Watson, on the company’s website. “Due to swift and significant increases in energy prices over recent months and, as a small supplier our inability to forward buy energy to allow us to access the best possible wholesale prices, means that the position of the business has become untenable.”
Customers are no longer able to log on to GB Energy’s website to access their accounts and some took to social media concerned they would lose credit balances built up over the summer months. But Ofgem advised account holders to sit tight and wait to hear from their new supplier on how they would get their money back.
“There is no need to worry as we will ensure your energy supplies are safe,” said Rachel Fletcher, Ofgem’s senior partner for consumers and competition. “Ofgem are actively working with the industry to ensure your transition to a new supplier is as smooth as possible. While this process is under way our advice is not to do anything as you can continue to rely on your energy supply as normal.”
The government has sought to increase competition in the retail market dominated by the “big six” suppliers – British Gas, E.ON, Npower, EDF, Scottish Power and SSE . There are now 41 companies competing for British households, but the business models of the smaller entrants are now being tested as electricity and gas prices start to rise – partly because of the devaluation of sterling since the Brexit vote.
In an interview earlier this year, Watson, a former submariner who worked in sales before moving into the energy sector, said it had been fortunate that wholesale costs had been low over the past couple of years.
“I think the challenge for independent suppliers will come when there is volatility in the wholesale market,” he told the trade magazine Utility Week in June. “That is when the hedging strategy comes into play and we are very conscious of that ... It is a risk and we are monitoring prices three times a day.”
GB Energy previously traded as Altitude Energy Supply from 2013 to 2014 and made a loss of £630,018 on sales of £22.2m in 2015. The company operated from Preston and had a staff of less than 20 despite its large customer base.
Ofgem will move GB Energy customers on to what is known as a “deemed” contract. The watchdog says on its website these are usually more expensive: “The supplier takes on more risk, as customers are moved to a new supplier quickly without the usual background credit checks. So, they also charge more, to make up for this extra risk.”
It is then up to GB Energy customers to ensure they are on the best tariff or switch to a new supplier. But with wholesale prices up this year it is unlikely they will be able to find a deal similar to their existing plan.
The Bank of England is due to provide a snapshot of the strength of Britain’s biggest lenders after assessing their resilience to a dramatic economic downturn and sharp fall in house prices.
Threadneedle Street will announce the outcome of its annual health check of the six biggest banks – and one building society, Nationwide – on Wednesday, alongside its assessment of the major risks to the financial system in the wake of the Brexit result.
The Bank will also scrutinise the effectiveness of measures aimed at limiting the risks in the housing market. It has previously said it is concerned about the ability of some households to keep paying their debts if unemployment rises and wage growth stalls.
The results will be the focus for investors. The banks being tested are Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds Banking Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, the UK arm of Spanish bank Santander and Standard Chartered, which is based in London but has most of its activities in emerging markets.
The tests were introduced in the wake of the 2008 banking crisis and are based on hypothetical scenarios devised by the Bank. “In the Bank’s 2016 stress scenario vulnerabilities across financial markets and the global and UK economies crystallise,” the Bank said.
The test also incorporates projections for fines and other costs associated with misconduct, although the Bank said: “There remains a very high degree of uncertainty around any approach to quantifying misconduct cost risks facing UK banks.”
The Bank has set out an imaginary five-year period in which there is a “synchronised global downturn” under which the global economy contracts by 1.9% – as it did during the financial crisis. It has also incorporated domestic factors: a 31% fall in house prices, 42% reduction in commercial property prices with the economy contracting by 4.3% and unemployment rising by 4.5 percentage points. The dollar rises against emerging market currencies and the oil price troughs at $20 per barrel.
When the pan-European banking regulator, the European Banking Authority, published the results of its assessment on major lenders earlier this year, RBS took the biggest hit to its financial strength of any UK bank subjected to the health checks.
It is the third annual test by the Bank of England. In the first, run in 2014, the Bank had focused on risk to UK households while in 2015 on global risks, such as a contraction in China and parts of the eurozone.
A year ago, when the results of the 2015 tests were published, Bank of England governor Mark Carney had said the biggest lenders were strong enough to withstand the pressures in the global economy.
The stress test results will be published at the same time that Carney sets out the issues monitored by the Bank’s financial policy committee, originally set up by the coalition government to try to avoid a rerun of the 2008 crisis.
The FPC has also said it will use its half-yearly financial stability report (FSR) to set out its review of the policy measures announced in June 2014 “to insure against the risk of a marked loosening in underwriting standards and a significant rise in the number of vulnerable households”.
At the time, the Bank set out measures to restrict lenders’ ability to lend more than 15% of their mortgages to customers needing to borrowing four and half times their income. It also toughened the test imposed on customers through the mortgage market review, which tests customers’ ability to repay their loans.
All roads lead to Rome, and experience would suggest, all autumn statements lead to roads.
Under Alistair Darling there was an M1 upgrade in what was then called a pre-budget report. His Conservative successor George “we are the builders” Osborne pledged the biggest road investment programme since the 1970s and a permanent pothole fund. Then last week, Osborne’s successor Philip Hammond stuck with tradition and promised to push ahead with road schemes in the “northern powerhouse” and to tackle congestion on key routes under plans to revive the UK’s pitiful productivity growth.
Such nods to drivers and hauliers are easily explained in a nation where cars are by far the most popular mode of transport and where almost three times more goods are moved by roads than by water and rail combined. Promises to bust traffic jams and plug potholes are easy wins for politicians – as is endlessly freezing fuel duty.
Similarly, when it comes to appearing to be doing something about the productivity puzzle it is far easier to talk about roads than the thorny issue of Britain’s addiction to low-paid, low-skilled work.
But Hammond will not be able to escape this reality if he is serious about raising productivity – a measure of what is produced for every hour worked. Likewise, if he and Theresa May want to address the economic discontent that was partly responsible for the Brexit vote he will have to ensure any productivity gains he does eke out are shared by low-paid workers.
As the chancellor said himself, Britain’s productivity gap with its neighbours has real repercussions on living standards.
“In the real world, it takes a German worker four days to produce what we make in five; which means, in turn, that too many British workers work longer hours for lower pay than their counterparts,” Hammond said.
It was a welcome appraisal of a problem that is too often discussed in abstract, jargon-laden terms. But Hammond still fell into the usual trap of turning to infrastructure and innovation for the solutions.
Roads and inventions like next-generation electric vehicles are all well and good, but in an economy dominated by the services sector, it too needs attention if the country is ever going to make meaningful inroads on productivity.
Of course, many of the technological advances that are made under the badge of innovation can help in the services sector. Internet banking and automatic checkouts are obvious examples.
But there is also evidence that services employers can make productivity gains by changing the way they treat their employees.
The Joseph Rowntree Foundation has been exploring this link between the prevalence of low-paid work and low productivity. In an analysis with the thinktank, the Institute for Public Policy Research [pdf], the charity found low-pay sectors constitute about 23% of our economy, but account for about a third of the UK’s productivity gap with leading western European economies.
JRF is rightly telling ministers to broaden the industrial strategy to include low-paying parts of the economy such as retail, care and catering, and that by doing so they could make greater economic gains and lift hundreds of thousands of people out of working poverty.
Finding ways to lift productivity in those sectors is not easy. But if solving our low productivity problem was simple, countless experts would not have dubbed it a “puzzle”.
There are three key areas that employers and policymakers can explore, beyond the usual technology fixes.
The first is the relationship between pay and productivity. In a classic chicken and egg situation, economists argue over what comes first: low pay or low productivity.
There is an argument that employers can only afford to raise wages, when productivity goes up. But work by the Living Wage Foundation and others has found raising pay can in turn raise productivity. Better paid workers are more motivated and more likely to stick around and accumulate skills. Seen another way, when employers are forced to pay more, they are more likely to seek ways to make work more productive. Ideally, this will happen with the government’s mandatory national living wage.
The second area is flexible working. Consider the case of a woman working for a retailer. She acquires years of experience, then has a child, takes maternity leave and returns to work part-time. Her employer wants to capitalise on the woman’s experience and offers her a senior role. Fearful of how that new role will fit in with her childcare arrangements, the woman turns down the promotion.
When JRF commissioned research into productivity and pay in the retail sector by the economist and former MP Kitty Ussher, she found about half of retail workers who already worked part-time said they would only accept a promotion if they could remain part-time. Little surprise then, that the study also revealed half of retail workers felt overqualified for the work they did.
Clearly, employers are missing a trick when they fail to help workers find ways to balance family commitments with career progression.
Alongside these workers for whom the overriding priority was to have controlled hours, Ussher identified a second group who wanted to work more hours and gain promotion to increase their earnings. Among that second group there was evidence of frustration at the lack of opportunities to get on.
This leads to the third area: engagement. If staff do not feel involved in deciding their hours or career path, it is unlikely they will feel ready to share suggestions on how their workplace could run more efficiently. Productivity suffers as a result.
Words like engagement sound fluffy, but manufacturing – which consistently outperforms on productivity – has been doing this for decades. In a well-run factory, staff are actively encouraged to make suggestions on small changes that could raise their productivity, such as the positioning of a tool. It’s called “continuous improvement”.
Ussher’s research found this kind of engagement was lacking in retail, where 72% of workers felt they could see possible improvements in how their business ran, but just 44% said those ideas were taken seriously.
With management clearly failing these workers, it was welcome that Hammond’s autumn statement contained £13m for a scheme to boost UK management skills.
But workers need more than just better managers to be more productive. They need better career paths, including quality apprenticeships, and they need more economic security, not zero-hours contracts.
Employers are crucial in this and so too is government backing. If the chancellor really wants to “build an economy that works for everyone” he and his fellow ministers must resist the temptation to pick winners at the expense of those working in the vast, low-paying, low productivity parts of the economy.
About 160,000 UK customers face potentially higher energy bills after a budget supplier closed down, blaming rising energy prices.
GB Energy Supply ceased trading this weekend, leaving many faced with the possibility of higher charges unless they ask for the cheapest deal from their new supplier.
Ofgem will oversee a new firm being appointed for GB Energy’s former customers that will best protect their interests. The energy watchdog said no customers would have their energy cut off during the changeover and any outstanding credit balances would be protected.
In a statement, GB Energy said: “Due to swift and significant increases in energy prices over recent months and, as a small supplier our inability to forward buy energy to allow us to access the best possible wholesale prices, means that the position of the business has become untenable.”
Customers were advised to take a meter reading immediately and wait for the new supplier to contact them regarding any outstanding credit balances. It is then down to them to inform the new supplier that they wanted to be put on the cheapest deal, Ofgem said, meaning those who fail to do so could be hit by increased costs.
No exit fees will be charged as a result of the closure.
Rachel Fletcher, Ofgem’s senior partner for consumers and competition, said: “If you are a customer of GB Energy Supply there is no need to worry as we will ensure your energy supplies are safe. Ofgem are actively working with the industry to ensure your transition to a new supplier is as smooth as possible. While this process is under way our advice is not to do anything as you can continue to rely on your energy supply as normal.”
Citizens Advice said it was working closely with Ofgem to ensure a smooth transition to a new supplier. “Although GB Energy Supply has gone out of business, customers don’t need to worry,” said Victoria MacGregor, director of energy. “This shouldn’t affect their gas and electricity supply so they’ll still be able to heat and light their home as normal.”
As I see from many posts on money forums and social media, I know I am not alone in complaining about the John Lewis Partnership credit card. But my situation is vexing me. John Lewis Finance revamped its website in early October, asking cardholders to re-register. I did so. Then, two weeks ago, I realised that my card expired this month and a replacement had not arrived.
It was apparent from the online posts about failed payments and direct debit problems that all was not hunky-dory. John Lewis said there was a “high volume of calls” and warned of a wait of up to 45 minutes. After 70 minutes I gave up and instead tried secure messaging, which then collapsed, so I sent a letter of complaint and asked that my card be mailed within a week.
So far this has not arrived, although my account has said for several weeks that a card is on its way. Repayment day resulted in my “faster” payment being returned. I attempted to reset this and try again. This time it was rejected.
The coup de grace, though, was last night when I tried to purchase my grandson’s birthday present, only to find the card was declined because it is now out of date.
John Lewis brand this as its own card, but the debacle has probably been created by HSBC which, I understand, runs the credit card side. As I can make no contact with the company I think John Lewis Partnership should be shamed into taking some responsibility for this. JM, Peebles, near Edinburgh
What a shambles. The John Lewis Partnership card – and yes, it is administered by HSBC – is the retailer’s flagship credit card product, offering rewards which can be used for shopping at John Lewis and Waitrose. But, from our postbag alone, it is clear that changes to IT systems in October have triggered major problems including rejected online payments, problems logging in, unhelpful and unsympathetic responses from customer services, and very long wait times when trying to contact them. We have included a second letter below but have received many more.
The company admits there have been problems: “Following recent changes to the website we experienced some initial technical issues which have now been resolved. This led to high volumes of calls to our customer services team, which resulted in customers encountering delays. We are very sorry for this and have significantly increased the size of the team to reduce call waiting times. We can assure customers that any late payment fees, along with the interest which was incurred as a result of the recent technical issues, have been refunded. Customers should be able to spend on their card as normal, however if they are experiencing problems we would ask them to contact us so we can investigate on a case-by-case basis.”
Given customers’ difficulties in getting through, John Lewis has listed answers on the FAQs page of its website. Since our intervention it has called you and, as a result, you managed to pay your bill. It gave you 5,000 points as a goodwill gesture, but it’s unclear if other similarly affected customers will get this. You still don’t have a replacement card, although you have been promised it will arrive by the end of this month.
• My problem concerns the non-payment of a long-standing direct debit into my John Lewis account last month, and the consequent imposition of interest.
Despite what it says on the Partnership card website and in the customer service telephone script, this matter is far from resolved, and anyone who has experienced a problem with their direct debit should persist in contacting customer services and speaking to someone. I spent 20 minutes on the phone (after many abortive attempts) and got the strong impression that the operator had no understanding of the issue or facts, and the eventual assurances I was offered about all being well in the next payment round were far from convincing. DM, Malmesbury, Wiltshire
After several phone calls from John Lewis your direct debit issues have been resolved and you have been refunded in full with the interest you were erroneously charged – £63.33. John Lewis said this payment now appears under the header “cash finance adjustment” rather than “interest credit adjustment” which had also caused confusion, and has confirmed exactly where the credit appears on your account. It has also given you £50 in compensation – again, this may not have been given to all cardholders.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
A market-leading savings bond announced in the autumn statement will hopefully encourage other providers to unveil better-paying deals, and could mean the government thinks interest rates may rise next year, according to one industry expert.
During his speech on Wednesday chancellor Philip Hammond pulled a small rabbit out of his hat in the form of a government-backed three-year NS&I savings bond expected to pay around 2.2% interest, which will go on sale in the spring. The Treasury said this was the “indicative” rate, and added: “This may be adjusted to reflect market conditions when the product is launched.”
The best current equivalent bond pays 1.63%, and Susan Hannums from Savingschampion.co.uk said the fact the government opted for a rate that is market-leading but not completely out of reach for other providers could encourage competition. “We may see a flurry of activity around that time.”
She added: “Does [the rate] mean they are expecting interest rates to rise next year? That might be why they are pricing it around that level.”
Nevertheless, the offer is not going to cause a mass outbreak of excitement, and many market commentators said high-interest current accounts still offer some of the best returns. Nationwide and Tesco Bank have, respectively, accounts paying 5% for 12 months and 3% with no time limit.
However, there was also bad news for savers last week, with figures showing cash Isa rates are on the slide. First Direct revealed it is cutting the rate on its cash Isa from 0.9% to 0.5% from 10 February 2017. It had only just cut the rate from 1.3%.
Cash Isa rates have taken a hammering of late, with information provider Moneyfacts saying the average long-term fixed Isa rate has dipped below 1% for the first time. This month the figure stood at 0.98% – down from 1.98% a year ago. The highest five-year fixed cash Isa rate currently on offer is 1.5% from Metro Bank.
Meanwhile, the average no-notice cash Isa rate is now just 0.73%. If you want a decent-paying easy-access Isa Coventry building society offers 1.1%. Those with cash in what may be the lowest-paying instant-access Isa – NatWest’s 0.01% on £1-£24,999 – should probably move it pronto.
On Wednesday, Hammond also confirmed the increase in the annual Isa allowance from £15,240 to £20,000 from April 2017.
Lucy Kellaway, associate editor of the Financial Times, has made news by announcing that, after three decades as a journalist, she is switching careers. Aged 57, she is to train to become a maths teacher. She also plans to work with a charity, Now Teach, to persuade others in midlife and older to follow her example and have what in the US is called an encore career.
“It’s one of the best jobs in the world but I’m not getting any better at it,” Kellaway said of her years in journalism. “I’m part of the lucky generation that’s paid off mortgages and has a pension. I can afford to do something that tangibly improves people’s lives.”
Not everyone, of course, is in what Kellaway describes as this “demographic sweet spot”: financially secure for life so they can make an occupational shift that may bring rich rewards but not pay the bills.
To be clear, an encore career is not the same as finding a job, any job, after redundancy, illness or “enforced retirement” – plights that have befallen 1.5 million people aged 50-69 in the UK in the last eight years, more than a million of whom would work if somebody would employ them. And it is different from having to work those extra years – to 70 for today’s twentysomethings, according to some predictions – to scrape together a pension.
In the US, Marc Freedman set up Encore.org, “second acts for the greater good”, 18 years ago to make use of the experience, wits and wisdom of older people. He defines these second (or third or more) careers in the second half of life, paid – on an often significantly reduced income – and unpaid, as combining “greater personal meaning and social impact to improve communities and the world”. Freedman was among the first to recognise what was unfolding demographically. The combination of longevity – many of today’s newborns will live to 100 – and retirements that already stretch to three and four decades, plus the sheer numbers of baby boomers reaching their 60s, 10,000 a day in the US, meant that volunteering required an overhaul and the entry requirements and training for jobs with social impact needed to adapt to admit recruits who already had 30 or 40 years of experience.
Freedman established a one-year training scheme, “a fellowship” so that a banker interested in, say, community regeneration or a doctor wanting to work in literacy, had accelerated instruction and a network of support. Then, 10 years ago, he launched a $100,000 Purpose prize for “exceptional individuals over 60 working to address critical social problems”, and innovation has flowed from the scheme. Among the winners of the prize are Vicki Thomas, a former executive in public relations, who via a charity, Purple Heart Homes, matches disabled members of the armed forces with repossessed homes donated by banks; and W Wilson Goode, a former mayor and retired academic, who runs a scheme mentoring the children of prisoners.
Inevitably, it’s not easy challenging the traditional pattern of working lives, as Kellaway has discovered. Men and women who have been teaching for years don’t take kindly to vintage amateurs, fortysomethings and older, arriving in the classroom. But, as she points out, an acute shortage of maths, science and language teachers has a negative impact on children and age may bring other benefits.
Recently, the government and Nesta, an organisation promoting innovation, announced grants of £4m to explore how charities and public services can tap into “the skills and experience of volunteers over 50 for the benefit of society”. But money alone can’t make a movement. It needs a man or a woman, such as Freedman, on a personal mission – and that, as yet, the UK lacks.
In the meantime, professors Lynda Gratton and Andrew Scott have been studying the issue of working lives in (much) later life and some of the stereotypes that hinder its acceptance. The co-authors of The 100-Year Life surveyed 10,000 people from across the world aged 24-80. The results, reported in the Harvard Business Review, indicate that it is not just the young who invest in new skills, who are excited about their work and who make an effort to keep fit. Those in their fifth, sixth and seventh decades do too. Again, while more than half those aged 46-60 want to “slow down”, fewer than 20% of those over 70 agree and more people under 45 (43%) than over (35%) said they were exhausted – with the least exhausted over 60. Leave aside the idea that rampant ageism might inhibit the 50-plus group from telling the whole truth.
Research says that retirement makes many of us happy. However, if you decide to delay it for a decade or so to take up a new career and “give something back”, that may also help to inject positivity into what is currently a highly negative narrative about our changing demographics and alleged inter-generational warfare. Encore careers offer a bonus not least in the power to shift ageing from a problem to part of a solution.
52, academic, producer, feminist activist, artist, director of her own company for 12 years, Home Live Art, qualified as a midwife in September 2016
“I began training at 47. It made internal sense to me. I felt I’d come to an end. I knew what I was doing in the arts and I wanted to work in a different way with people. I wanted to combine art and midwifery and in a more caring, direct, hands-on role.
“I’d been running my own company but in my midwifery training I enjoyed stepping away from the leadership role. I had experience but I had to show some humility and learn from people much younger than myself.
“I was the oldest in training but there were others in their 30s and 40s and I have good friends now in their 20s and that’s refreshing. I’m fortunate in that I could afford to take the financial risk, I have a supportive husband and my own business but other older students with me took a bigger financial hit and it will be tougher still with the removal of the bursary system [bursaries will be replaced with grants next year].
“I’ve been a mother for 20 years so now I feel very strongly about ‘mothering the mother’, looking after other women in childbirth. I see myself doing this part-time for 10 or 15 years. It’s not trying to forge a career; it’s for different reasons.”
“I’ve had a lifelong interest in economic and social justice and woods and trees. I got my chainsaw qualification as a way of relaxing when I was a trade union organiser.
“At 53, I resigned from a job at the International Labour Organisation in Geneva. I wanted to come home and do something that meant I could give something back and work in a sustainable way. I did a two-week tree-climbing course and everybody else was a lot younger but I’m in good health and a long-distance runner.
“My brother Eamonn was 50 and a retired firefighter so we set up the tree surgery business together. As a volunteer I also manage a 63-acre wood. We also recycle by turning the wood we bring down into firewood.
“If I’d stayed full time as a trade unionist I’d probably be dead from a heart attack by now. When I was at school the careers advice person gave me a test and told me that my ideal occupation was farming or forestry. Now I feel so lucky. I love it up in the trees. When you’ve been climbing all day you know it but as long as my body holds out, I’ll keep going.”
A mother of two sons, 18 and 23, Lee was a carer for 20 years after leaving school with GCSEs in English anda art. “It was the only thing I thought I could do.” Fourteen years ago, she began to care for John and Irene Leal, a former headmaster and his wife, both in their 80s. In 2012, with John’s encouragement, she began a BA fine arts degree. “He had been waiting for my results but he died, aged 95, the day before,” said Lee.
She received a first-class degree and won a scholarship to do an MA at the Royal College of Art in oil painting and photography, where she is now studying, in addition to working part-time in Sainsbury’s.
“I do oil paintings and the subjects are influenced by my passion about social issues, about poverty and unemployment and homelessness and the loneliness of older people. I visited South Africa in 2011 and it changed my whole way of thinking. I wanted to do work that meant something that could be a catalyst.
“I want to set up a gallery and a work space in a deprived community to teach young people and encourage local artists – to give them a chance of something better. As a student, financially it’s crippling – canvases can cost up to £200 – but I believe as long as you have passion you can accomplish anything.
“Half my sitting room is my studio. That’s where I make the magic happen. Being a mature student is challenging, delightful and sometimes it’s lonely, but I love the environment because I’m learning and it means, eventually, I can give something back.”
Will banning letting agency fees lead to higher rents? We ask the experts
First of all, I want to reassure you that things are infinitely better where I stand today, than where you are now. At the moment it feels like nothing is going right – be that your job, boyfriend, family, or friends. You feel unloveable and out of control. This will pass. An unstable and, frankly, crappy upbringing has at times taken its toll on you.
Your first job was in the film industry as a runner in 1998. While you’re not afraid of hard work, the relentlessly long hours and low pay took its toll and after 18 months working in London, you were £15,000 in debt. This was quite the wake up call. You’d wanted to work in the film industry your whole life and then it wasn’t what you thought it would be at all.
Onto a B2B publishing house as a PA. It was here that you met Mundy Ellis, who took a chance on you and trained you as a journalist – she will teach you to fight for what you believe in, and that your natural cynicism is healthy. She will challenge and support you in equal measure and will be a positive female role model in your life. In time, you’ll go on to be that role model for others too.
Over the years, there will be more career changes – from journalism back to television and post-production, then to PR – but none of these moves will be wasted. You’re gaining so much great experience, making contacts for life, and paving your way to a job that loves you and vice versa.
Throughout this time, you’ve always been more than a little uncomfortable. You can’t stand still. You’ve struggled to fit into normal office environments – the sight of rows of bowed heads at rows of desks fills you with deep depression – and you’ve always questioned those in authority. You have a heightened sense of “what’s fair” and that’s not always paid off for you. But none of your struggles will be wasted. Those attributes that you think make you “unemployable” are what enable you to take the leap and become an entrepreneur. 
You’re able to deal with huge amounts of stress. You’re willing to take chances. You can cope with whatever is thrown at you. You have great planning and crisis-management skills.
In 2011, you will move back to Bristol and leave the depressing daily two-and-a-half-hour London commute behind you. You will start your own PR business Conversation Creation from your kitchen table and – after years of being ashamed by your surname, because of the connotations with your childhood – you will launch Espensen Spirit, a range of flavoured gins, vodkas and whiskies.
As I look around now, I’m surrounded by chaos – we’re about to open a cafe and event space on the ground floor of our office. But I’ve never been happier. It’s warm, relaxing and comfortable. I walk my dog to work every morning. I’ve found the balance between work and a personal life that you just couldn’t find in London. We often hear “I wish I loved my job”, but I think the desire should be to say “My job loves me”.
You will champion this at Espensen Spirit, by encouraging your team to set objectives that help them achieve the home life they want, as well as career goals. I’m not saying we’re relentlessly happy or never stressed, but we spend a great deal of time making sure every person we add to the team is right. We know we have the right ingredients to think our way out of a problem collectively, and support and care for each other. It is so important to surround yourself with the right people, and nurture a healthy culture around you. People are either radiators and keep you warm, or drains who are only interested in what you can do for them. I have a no drain policy now.
Mental health will always have a place in your life as part of your ongoing recovery from complex post-traumatic stress disorder (CPTSD), but it’s made you an ardent champion of putting staff welfare first. Those of us who have psychiatric injuries should not be afraid to search for the job that suits us. And you have found coping mechanisms that help, such as getting up at 5am and going to bed at about 8pm to deal with your insomnia. Self-care is the most fundamental part of your recovery.
No matter how stressful running my own business has been, it has never been as stressful as worrying about holding down a job working for someone else. Don’t sweat the small stuff. Without your fighting spirit, I wouldn’t be here to write this to you. So keep fighting. I’m very proud of you. That’s not something I would have been able to say to myself when I was your age, I know, but it’s true.
Are you an entrepreneur who would like to write a letter to your younger self? Email us at smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com to take part in this series.
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
Car insurance premiums are set to break through the £600 barrier for the first time next year as insurers pass on higher costs and this week’s premium tax hike, experts are warning. On Wednesday the chancellor, Philip Hammond, announced he is to increase insurance premium tax (IPT) from 10% to 12% from June.
This means drivers, now typically paying around £50 a year to the Treasury when they insure their car, will see it rise to above £60. Some young drivers could have to pay more than £250 just in the IPT part of their premium, according to comparison site GoCompare.
IPT, levied on around 50m insurance policies (including car, home and medical), has gone up nearly five times since it was introduced in 1994 at a rate of 2.5%. The AA says the extra tax will add further pressure on drivers already battling steep increases in underlying premiums. Its benchmark British Insurance Premium index shows a 16.3% rise over the past 12 months with the average “shop around” premium at £586.
“It’s disappointing the chancellor seems to have used the potential £40 saving on the average premium due to the whiplash crackdown, to increase IPT,” says the AA. “The upward pressure on premiums continues, which coupled with the unwarranted hike in IPT will see premiums go through the £600 mark before any benefit from the whiplash crackdown takes effect.”
Matt Oliver, car insurance spokesperson at GoCompare, says there are still “genuine inflationary forces in the market”. “That means it is unlikely we will see any real flattening for motor premiums in the next few months.
“Until firm action is delivered on whiplash and the compensation culture, claims costs will continue to rise. Any signs that the rate had slowed earlier this year are likely to be completely undermined by the announcement of a further increase in IPT.”
What can you do to keep premiums down? Guardian Money advises:
• Shopping around at renewal is key, but do so in advance. Buyers get significantly lower quotes (£100 less) if they buy 30 days in advance, rather than the day before cover is required.
• Don’t overbuy cover – if you only drive 5,000 miles a year, don’t insure for 10,000. And if you can park off-road, do so and tell your insurer.
• Consider adding a spouse or parent as a named driver – it could reduce the premium by hundreds of pounds.
• Don’t soup up your car with sports exhausts, spoilers etc – but do fit a tow bar. Bizarrely, adding one can lower your premium by as much as 20%. Who knew?
What do you do when your children have moved beyond piggy banks but aren’t old enough for a fully fledged current account? The good news is that there are a number of “youth” bank accounts on the market that can help teenagers, and those fast approaching their teens, obtain their first debit card, learn about budgeting and take their first steps towards financial independence.
However, which provider you choose will depend in part on how much financial freedom you want your offspring to have. Are you happy for them to have their own debit card which they can use in shops and online? Or would you rather they were limited to a cash card that can only be used to withdraw money from ATMs?
Aside from the youth accounts offered by high street players, there are also a growing number of products available that combine a prepaid debit card with a smartphone app. These are likely to appeal to parents keen to retain control over what their children do with their cash – for example, they want to be 100% sure they are not buying things that they shouldn’t be, or spending too much on iTunes. But the downside of these card-app combos is they all involve a fee.
“By getting used to running their own financial affairs youngsters will hopefully adopt money-management skills that will stand them in good stead later in life,” says Andrew Hagger of financial website MoneyComms. “Teenagers are far more tech-savvy than their parents these days, and they’ll have no qualms about banking online and by smartphone, and using the likes of Apple Pay or Android Pay as a means of payment.”
Many banks offer these. Typically they are available to children aged 11 and above, making them a good home for pocket money or cash earned from jobs.
They work in a similar way to adult current accounts, but do not offer an overdraft facility, so a youngster can only spend what they have in their account and won’t get any nasty surprises, says Charlotte Nelson at financial data website Moneyfacts.co.uk. And there are usually no fees or charges.
Many of these accounts pay in-credit interest, though some may take the view that a table-topping interest rate isn’t their main priority because they will only be keeping relatively small sums in the account.
One account that might appeal to Guardian readers is the FlexOne offered by Nationwide building society, which has mutual (as opposed to plc) status, which means it is owned by and run for the benefit of its 14 million-plus members. FlexOne is aimed at those aged between 11 and 17, though it can be held up to the age of 23. There is a promise from Nationwide that it won’t charge anything for using the account, and customers can choose either a cash card for taking money out of ATMs, or a contactless Visa debit card that can also be used in shops, online and over the phone. The account can be managed via Nationwide’s mobile app and pays 1% credit interest on balances up to £1,000, plus offers a linked regular savings account paying 3.5%. (I should disclose that both my teenage daughters have had a FlexOne account for almost two years and they have been a success.)
Santander offers the 123 Mini Current Account for those aged between 11 and 18, where again there is the choice of a cash card or a Visa debit card. You earn interest once you have £100 or more in the account.
Meanwhile, both Lloyds Bank and TSB offer an Under 19s Account, paying 1.5% and 2.5% interest respectively on balances up to £2,500. These accounts can be opened by those aged 11-17 and 11-18 respectively, and both offer the choice of a Visa debit card or a simple cash card.
HSBC’s offering is called MyAccount and is for children aged 11-17. A Visa debit card is automatically provided, though the bank says that if for any reason this is not wanted, it can stop one from being sent out.
Meanwhile, Barclays has an account for those aged 11-15 paying 0.25% interest, with a choice between a contactless debit card and a cash card, as well as one for 16-19-year-olds.
Halifax has Expresscash for 11- to 17-year-olds which pays 1.51% interest and comes with a Visa debit card, as does NatWest’s Adapt account for those aged 11-18, which pays 1%. The Co-operative Bank does not have a youth account, but people can apply for its current account once they turn 16.
The opening requirements for these accounts vary, with an adult sometimes needing (or wanting) to be involved. Nationwide’s FlexOne, for example, can be opened online or in branch, though an adult must be present to open the account in branch for children under 16, while applications can only be made online for those aged 14 and over.
Nelson says that when choosing a youth account, “it’s always important to shop around and not necessarily stick to the same provider as the parent or guardian”. Hagger adds: “These current accounts aren’t marketed particularly aggressively by our banks and building societies, which is a shame as they are a must-have for today’s 11- to 17-year-olds who seek financial independence and the chance to pick up some valuable money-related life skills along the way.”
There are several of these and they all work in a similar way, with a prepaid Mastercard or Visa for the child alongside a mobile app. Typically, parents put money into their child’s card account, and the app enables them to monitor transactions. Three of the main providers are Osper, which is aimed at eight to 18-year-olds and their parents, and which has been endorsed by TV presenter Davina McCall; goHenry, for those aged between six and 18; and nimbl, for eight to 18-year-olds.
These offer quite a few advantages – for example, you can often “lock” the card if it has been lost or stolen, set spending limits etc. But these parental controls come at a cost: Osper is free for 30 days, then costs £2 per child per month, billed annually; goHenry is free for two months, then is £2.49 per child per month; and nimbl is free for three months, then £10 per card per year. In some cases there are even extra fees on top of this – for example, nimbl charges 49p per ATM withdrawal in the UK (the first one each month is free).
The real shock about this week’s decision to ban letting fees to tenants is that it did not happen earlier. For more than a decade in Money we have highlighted the exploitative activity of some (but by no means all) letting agents. It evidently reached such absurd levels that in the end even a Tory government had to end the farce.
We have seen letting agents demand £800 in fees on a £650-a-month one-bed flat. Bills for £360 for running a standardised contract through the photocopier, and £90 for a credit check that costs the agent little more than a fiver. Tenants have had to go through the rigmarole of these sorts of bills every time they are forced to move.
Back in May 2004 I wrote how some letting agents were “deceiving tenants out of huge amounts of cash with myriad charges and fees that verge on the criminal”. In 2009 I wrote “Letting agents: are they even worse than estate agents?” The same year I suggested we “let letting agents sweat”. Finally in June this year I wrote a column headlined “It’s time to end the great letting agency rip-off in England and Wales”.
Truth is, some agents got too greedy. Not that many will agree. When news of the ban emerged, Haart said it was “yet another unwelcome and haphazard government intervention ... yet another government blow for landlords.” LCP, a London agent, said it was a “further attack on beleaguered landlords”.
The victim mentality among some agents and landlords is comical. Official figures this week showed that over the past four years, average incomes have nudged ahead by 1.7% a year, while rents have gone up 2.2% and house prices have jumped 5.6%. In parts of the country, it has been a lot worse.
It is simply undeniable that the owners of property have won, and tenants have lost. Buy-to-let merchants have made gains of 1,400% since 1996, far better than any other investment. Yet it’s these winners who bleat loudest. If I were them I’d have kept my gob shut about just how much money I had been skimming off working people.
Some more perspicacious landlords saw it coming. David Lawrenson of LettingFocus.com said: “Banning all tenant fees is a draconian step. However, the letting agency business, in particular, only has itself to blame. Too many agents charged rapacious levels of fees, frequently far in excess of the actual costs. Also, we are convinced too many engaged in hiding fees, only revealing them at the last minute when the tenant was committed.”
Letting agents will now have to try to pass the costs on to landlords, which is only right because they are the customer and are in a much better position to decide if the fee is acceptable, or if they wish to take their business elsewhere. Unfortunately, on forums such as Property118 some agents are trying to devise “workarounds” – one alleges that “larger agents are secretly discussing setting up referencing companies, and will only deal with prospective tenants who will use their company”.
I doubt such ruses will work. I’m more inclined to agree with an agent on the same forum who said that the ban on fees has been in Scotland for many years and “the sun is still rising in the morning and the rental market is alive and kicking. One thing I find strange is the view that landlords will have to put up rents to accommodate this.
“In my experience, the market sets the rent, not the landlord. Most landlords will take as much rent as they can get for a property in the prevailing market, so to challenge this on the basis that rents will rise seems a bit disingenuous.”
When Christopher Seddon popped into a Waitrose store last May on behalf of his housebound 89-year-old mother, he was only planning to buy a few items to get her through the week. After paying, he was stunned when two policemen seized and handcuffed him in front of watching shoppers. He was then forced to spend six hours in a cell at the local police station before being charged with stealing £102-worth of meat.
Over the next three months Seddon, a published author who lives in north London, says he spent £9,600 on legal fees and expert reports to prove that it was a case of mistaken identity and clear his name. Eventually the case against him was dropped, and Waitrose offered £500 to say sorry because he is a “valued customer” – but he says the incident has left him thousands of pounds out of pocket and he describes the way he was treated as “nothing short of scandalous”.
Seddon’s nightmare began when he made his twice-weekly visit to see his housebound mother who lives alone near the Waitrose store in Chesham, Bucks. Each week he shops for her, but as he left the store on that fateful Saturday afternoon he was confronted by two police officers. “They seized me, then handcuffed me with my arms behind my back, stating that they were arresting me on suspicion of shoplifting 17 days earlier, in spite of the fact that on that day I hadn’t even been in Chesham. The security guard thrust a mobile phone in my face [with a CCTV still on it] and screamed ‘do you deny this is you?’ at me. All this was going on in front of dozens of shoppers.”
He says he was not allowed to call his mother, who he knew would be distressed when he inexplicably failed to return. He was held at Aylesbury police station for more than six hours.
“Despite the nightmare of the situation I assumed that I could clear up what was obviously a case of mistaken identity – but I was wrong. When I was eventually questioned, I was shown CCTV footage from the afternoon of 11 May showing a bald male aged about 60 concealing £100 of meat products in a bag and leaving without paying. I was told that I had been identified as the offender by the security guard from a CCTV still he had downloaded to his mobile. But on that day I was working on a book at my north London flat and, ironically, visited the Waitrose store on the Holloway Road.”
In a statement given to the police after Seddon’s arrest, the security guard claimed Seddon had also visited the Chesham store just a few days earlier and become nervous when he saw he was being watched. He said he then saw Seddon run from the store.
Seddon believes the police were greatly influenced by this claim. He says the CCTV evidence, not available at the time of his arrest, shows that while he was in the store at that time, it did not show him running away.
“I had come into the store for a bacon and egg sandwich for lunch, saw that there were none on the shelves and decided to go to Sainsbury’s instead. I left at a normal pace and never noticed the security guard. I even complained about the lack of bacon and egg sandwiches on Twitter. But the police believed the security guard’s account of me running from the store, as well as his claim that I was the man shown on CCTV stealing meat products, and charged me with the earlier theft.”
As a result, Seddon says he was forced to hire first a solicitor and then a barrister at a cost of £6,000 plus VAT. Knowing that he had been in London when the theft took place, but living alone, he had to employ a mobile phone expert to provide evidence to that effect. He also employed a CCTV specialist, John Kennedy, who made his name in the Jamie Bulger case in which CCTV footage was central to the conviction of the boys who abducted him.
Kennedy’s report states clearly that Seddon was not the person who had stolen the meat, and that the security guard’s claim that Seddon had run from the store was not true. It lists several key differences in the look of the two men, and even notes that their jackets were of different colours, contrary to what the guard told police. The expert report suggested that the photo of the thief on the security guard’s mobile phone was distorted in the act of downloading it. The image was compressed and the aspect ratio changed as a result, it said.
After Seddon had paid for all this, the case was dropped the day before it was due to be heard at High Wycombe magistrates court on the instruction of the Crown Prosecution Service. But Seddon says he has since been told by his solicitor that he will recoup no more than 20%-30% of his costs, leaving him substantially out of pocket. “Having cleared my name I approached Waitrose with my expert report, naively thinking that it would be horrified by what had happened and would offer me compensation for the inconvenience, distress and financial loss, as well as take urgent steps to ensure that such an incident could not be repeated,” he says.
Instead, he says the supermarket spent two months fobbing him off before concluding that its security guard had done nothing wrong.
“They offered me a derisory £500 as a ‘goodwill’ gesture to a ‘valued customer’. Their emails throughout were headed ‘Waitrose customer feedback’ as if the whole affair was of no more consequence than an unsatisfactory purchase from the bakery. If a security guard cannot distinguish between running and walking then it is a matter of significant public concern that they continue to be employed as a security guard,” he says.
A spokesman for Waitrose declined to offer an explanation as to what had happened. Instead, he pointed us towards Thames Valley police. “We are very sorry to hear of the distress Mr Seddon has experienced. You will need to speak to the Thames Valley police press office about the decisions taken. We are continuing our conversations with Mr Seddon and the third-party security company with whom we work so, as you will appreciate, it would not be appropriate for us to comment further at this stage.”
Seddon says questions remain as to why he was treated so badly. At a meeting last week with Thames Valley police, which is still investigating his complaint against the force, Seddon says he was told by a long-serving officer that he had not ever heard of a comparable incident.
Seddon is still furious at his treatment at the hand of the store, and is considering legal action. “If Waitrose will not accept responsibility, then sooner or later it will happen again to somebody else. For my part, I would have been better off accepting a police caution for a crime that I did not commit and paying Waitrose for £100 of meat products that somebody else stole. It is morally repugnant that I should be left thousands of pounds out of pocket when I have done nothing wrong,” he says.
Thames Valley Police said that as it had received a complaint in relation to this investigation it would be inappropriate to comment further.
Christopher Seddon’s treatment at the hands of both Waitrose and the police shows a gap in the law: a completely innocent person can be arrested and prosecuted and may not be entitled to any compensation, not even all of his legal costs, writes barrister Richard Colbey.
When police make an arrest they are not liable for the consequences if they act on reasonable suspicion. There are sound public policy reasons why they should be free to do their job without worrying too much about the consequences, so long as they behave reasonably. 
Here the report by the security staff gave them that suspicion and meant they were duty-bound to question Seddon, and entitled to arrest him. Marching him away in handcuffs was unnecessary and apparently deplored by a more mature police officer, but it was not unlawful.
Had the security guard effected the arrest the situation would have been different. There is not the same public interest in “citizens’ arrests”, and civilians have no protection if they arrest an innocent person, however reasonable the suspicion.
In 1992 a Marina Davidson was accused, wrongly, of stealing from Woolworths in Bangor. The court of appeal said that a security guard, and hence a Woolworths employee, could only be liable for an arrest if it was effected by the police – ie, if they had given some direction or made a direct request or encouragement that the arrest should be made. There the court of appeal decided that the store detective had merely made a report – but the guard in Seddon’s­ case may have overstepped the mark. 
Also it is possible that Seddon could claim slander, but that is a notoriously difficult and expensive cause of action. He would have to show the guard acted maliciously as, otherwise, what the guard said to the police would be privileged and also that he suffered “serious harm” – a somewhat vague statutory hurdle introduced in 2014 to discourage the proliferation of defamation claims.
A person acquitted of a crime will usually be able to recover his costs from public funds, but only at fairly derisory legal aid rates. These will be nothing like £10,000 even for a trial that goes ahead, and are typically hundreds, rather than thousands, of pounds. 
The Law Society advises solicitors to warn clients where they are incurring costs that are unlikely to be recoverable, and if Seddon’s solicitors had not given such advice then it could have taken a hit on much of the difference between its bill and the amount recovered.
• Update: Christopher Seddon has confirmed that his solicitors did advise him that he may not be able to recover all his legal costs of defending himself. The barrister’s view was amended on 28 November 2016 to clarify this point.
So will the ban on lettings agents charging fees to tenants push rents up? That’s the question many renters will be asking after the government’s autumn statement announcement.
The good news is that this is more than a proposal: the chancellor, Philip Hammond, said ministers “will” bring in a ban, which means that tenants will no longer have to pay fees that can run into the hundreds when they sign a new tenancy agreement. But some felt there was a worrying lack of detail – Hammond merely said it would happen “as soon as possible”, while the Treasury said the government “will consult on this in due course”. So it’s far from clear when the fees will be outlawed.
But how much do people actually pay? There are varying figures. The latest English Housing Survey, published in July, found that 40% of private renters were charged a fee by a letting agency or landlord in 2014-15, at an average of £223. Citizens Advice last year put the total average tenancy fee at £337, while a 2013 report from housing charity Shelter said one in seven (15%) renters using an agency forked out more than £500.
However, the biggest area of debate was whether the ban will drive up rents, on the grounds that landlords will now have to pay these costs and will simply pass them on to tenants. Or will landlords or letting agents absorb the costs?
Guardian Money decided to round up the views of experts and commentators on the key question of whether the ban will mean higher rents.
Generation Rent, which campaigns for better privately rented homes, says: “We don’t think it will [push up rents], mainly because rents are really just set by what people are prepared to pay in the market. Rents have been rising because demand has been so high.” The organisation says the fact that there is such huge variation in the level of fees charged shows there is a lot of scope for getting these costs down. It adds that landlords will have the power to shop around for lower fees.
PricedOut, the group campaigning for affordable house prices, believes it is “very likely that landlords and agents will bear most of the costs, as they have done in Scotland, which banned fees years ago”. It adds that even if all fees were to be passed on in the form of higher rent, “this will still benefit tenants, as their costs will be spread and they will find it easier to move home, giving them more bargaining power”.
Shelter published a report in 2013 that looked at what had happened in Scotland. There, it has been illegal to charge “premiums” – fees charged at the start of a tenancy, in addition to rent and the deposit – to renters since 1984. However, the law wasn’t enforced until 2012, when it was clarified. Shelter said its research had shown that landlords in Scotland “were no more likely to have increased rents since 2012 than landlords elsewhere in the UK”. In fact, only one landlord in 120 surveyed said they had noticed an increase in agency fees and had passed this on to their tenants.
easyProperty, the online estate agent, says: “Any sensible agency won’t pass on the charges to landlords due to competition in the sector, so we don’t foresee rent rises, as there is no need to add the fees to rents.”
Housing minister Gavin Barwell was asked two months ago whether he would follow the Scottish example and ban letting fees. He tweeted: “Bad idea – landlords would pass cost to tenants via rent. We’re looking at other ways to cut upfront costs & raise standards”. It’s not clear whether Barwell has since changed his mind… or had it changed for him.
Beresfords, a chain of estate agents, says: “Ultimately landlords will be expected to pick up most, if not all, of any fees lost by agents. However, landlords will want to recoup such increases, and the most obvious way to do so is by increasing the rent. Unfortunately, over time, tenants could end up paying much more in uplifted rent than what they would have expected to pay in initial fees at the outset.”
The Residential Landlords Association says: “This will not help tenants, especially those who are ‘just managing’. Agents’ fees have to be paid by somebody. If any extra fees are passed on to landlords, tenants will end up paying them for ever, as rents will increase.”
Simon Gerrard, MD of London estate agency Martyn Gerrard and a past president of the National Association of Estate Agents, says yields for landlords are already low, “so lowering them further means landlords will simply sell rather than rent, which will push rents up even higher because there will be less stock”. He adds: “The landlords that do stay in the market will have to increase rents to cover these new costs.”
Lord Bourne of Aberystwyth, a communities minister, said during a House of Lords debate on 18 November that Gavin Barwell has “been clear that we must be mindful of the potential impact on rents from banning fees paid by tenants… This is not a straightforward issue, and we have to be careful that any changes do not have impacts elsewhere”.
Over the past decade Sarah Cross has become an expert on London’s rental market, having moved every year between 2007 and 2015 – often not out of choice. So she was pleased at the government’s decision to ban letting agents’ fees to tenants. “That’s a really positive thing – previously we’ve paid nearly £1,000 just in fees and charges.”
Like many young couples in the capital, Cross and her partner work full-time but are still priced out of buying. They rent a “very compact” two-bedroom house in Leytonstone, east London, where they live with their son Oliver who is nearly two and attends nursery.
She and her partner both earn above the national average – their household income is £80,000 – but they still can’t afford to buy a family house in London. “We have no money to save after rent and bills,” says Cross, 31, who works as an operations specialist for a major company. This also means the couple’s plans to grow their family are currently on hold. “We’d like another child, but living in London limits your funds – and we don’t really feel like we have enough behind us to have a larger family.”
The couple pay around £1,300 a month in rent, with childcare swallowing a further £1,000. They are clearly not financially destitute – “We go on holiday” – but Cross adds: “One of us basically pays the rent and bills, and the other pays for childcare and essentials.”
Having had to move so often in the past, the birth of Oliver in 2014 saw them negotiate a two-year contract “to ensure we wouldn’t have to disrupt our whole lives one year later”.
Cross says that, like many people, they are in a catch-22 situation: house prices are stratospheric because too few homes have been built in London to sustain the number of people, but they don’t feel they can move out because “the employment wouldn’t be there”.
She says something needs to be done to get the capital’s housing market working properly. She is “intrigued” by the news of 40,000 additional affordable homes, but says: “It’s really important we build more affordable homes that are fit for purpose – we’ve viewed several shared ownership schemes and haven’t found one appropriate for family living - and that maybe we limit the price that we pay on rental properties.”
Cross is a supporter of the charity Shelter, which also welcomed the decision to ban letting agent fees.
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
Any answers? We’re moving to another city for a year, which means we’ve got to lease our home and rent somewhere new. Do we go furnished or unfurnished, and what do we do with all our stuff if we don’t take it with us? Any tips on how to make this all less hellish?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
I became a business analyst (examining how a business works to identify any changes that need to be made) after university, and am now in my late 30s. It was an area I was always interested in because it combines analytical thinking with, crucially for me, interaction with workers who can both suggest changes and who have to then carry them out. It is practical and personal.
I started out in staff jobs but found there were more opportunities in one-off projects with different companies – move from firm to firm, analyse the business, work with the team, formulate an outcome and move on.
So five years ago I became a freelance/contract worker in the banking sector. It is well paid and I could afford a few weeks off between contracts – relatively stress free – until the next job came along. I used this time to do a distance learning degree in international affairs, which has added to my CV.
But this year, for the first time, I am seriously considering a complete change of career. In truth I feel I have no choice: I finished my last contract in spring 2016 and since then nothing.
First, the contract market overall seems dead with 40%-50% fewer vacancies in banking, plus thousands of contractors and perms out looking. Specifically, as a business analyst there are fewer vacancies because companies and the government aren’t starting new projects – I’d guess as a hangover from the Brexit decision.
Secondly, the department and role to which I am usually assigned have moved into a combined IT function, which seems an industry trend. This is not a great fit for me as I don’t have an IT background, and find that the methods of working leave me feeling I am in completely the wrong job, something I didn’t feel before. I’ve always been people-focussed (as opposed to IT-focussed), and under the new way of working interaction is very limited. We are expected to write software specifications and test systems. This is not something I have done before and not the direction I want my career to go in.
I have to face the fact the old model is largely outmoded and most job adverts are for hybrid business and systems analyst types. So where now?
The subtitle of EF Schumacher’s best-selling 1973 book Small is Beautiful was “A study of economics as if people mattered”. Even then he found much of economic theory and practice far too mechanistic and all too often failing to take into account the fears and feelings of human beings. The same can be said today of the so-called technological revolution – and the predicted advance of artificial intelligence will make matters worse. As in the 1970s, there will almost certainly be a real and growing need for organisations to remind themselves of human nature, and to structure and conduct themselves “as if people mattered.”
Which is why I wonder if you’re right to consider a complete career change. You have always been people-focussed and have many years of invaluable experience. Perhaps you should start to think of yourself not as a business analyst with all its modern systems connotations, but more as a business adviser making recommendations to CEOs and department heads based on an understanding of human ambitions and motivations.
Companies offering advice of this nature already exist, and certain individuals working in this field have built enviable reputations for themselves. So before striking out and trying to do something totally different, do please explore this possibility with some care.
• You’re practical and determined and enjoy working with people, seeing positive change, with an interest in international affairs and presumably politics. Charities with an international focus, (inter)national groups that lobby for change, global development organisations, human resource roles with a focus on organisational development and change – all of these could suit. Or how about going into politics yourself? TheRunningGirl
• Apply for hybrid roles if you meet 30% of the requirements. Instead of moving further into IT, which isn’t your wheelhouse, perhaps you could consider moving into other people-focused project roles, such as process analyst, change manager or project manager? Perhaps consider permanent roles as well as contract roles. It’s a tough market and sometimes you need a survival job. PollyPrissyPants
• Realise that if you work to improve the IT side of being a business analyst, it won’t be at the expense of the people side. TerminalDecline
I am in the strange position of applying for a job I don’t want. I’m in a tiny team in a small company which is expanding, and consequently our workload has increased enormously, so a senior position has been advertised in our team.
The role includes responsibilities I do not want to take on, as I don’t want any additional stress, but the job description also includes roles in which I am acknowledged as being the company expert. (It’s a niche industry so these skills are not directly transferable.)
My boss is aware that I don’t think some aspects of the job are within my skill set, but has advised me to apply anyway. I think this is a benchmarking exercise, but have to accept that I would not be happy if the job went to someone I felt was less qualified than me.
I don’t know how to approach this in these circumstances. How common are benchmarking interviews and what would you advise?
You must be careful that you don’t come across as a cherry-picker, only too happy to take on some aspects of a new role but disinclined to accept other, less attractive, responsibilities. There are very few jobs of any seniority that don’t involve some less agreeable aspects; promotion nearly always entails some of them.
This interview process may well be primarily a benchmarking exercise – like all benchmarking, the aim being to establish a standard against which future experience can be measured – but you would be wise to take it seriously. You say you don’t want this job, but something strange happens to people once they enter the race. Be prepared to be bitterly disappointed if you don’t get it. And if you do get it, it’s because they think you can do it – and you almost certainly can.
• As it’s a small company and there are only a few aspects you’re not comfortable with, the firm will have the flexibility to move those parts elsewhere. So go for it. Your boss thinks you are great, you are in a small growing company – it is about as good as it gets. CaptainGrey
• If you are ambitious, then apply this minute. Most new jobs will have aspects outside your skill set – the point is that after some experience/training they will be very much IN your skill set. Other than that, approach it like any other interview. Show that you know how the new position relates to the bigger picture as well as the team you’ll be managing. Talk to your new boss, how does he see the new position playing out? TenementFunster
• If you’ve been advised to go for the job despite your misgivings, it seems the company wants you for this job and the interview is likely a formality. If you don’t want the job, you shouldn’t apply as your only other option would be to perform badly in interview, which doesn’t reflect well on you. smithathon
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
Just over 12 months ago I gave myself a challenge: give up spending on all but the essentials for a whole year. I started on Friday 27 November, just as many other people were hitting the shops. It hasn’t always been easy, but a year on I am wealthier and wiser. Embarrassingly, I have also realised just how much money I’ve squandered down the pub, in restaurants and through mindless shopping.
As a personal finance journalist people assumed I was good with money but while I wrote a lot about the merits of saving, I wasn’t practising what I preached. I figured that because I earned a good wage, didn’t have any credit card debt and my bank account was in the black, I didn’t need to worry about how much money was leaving my account.
I was spending without thinking, lured in by advertising and the promise that I could spend my way to happiness. I was stuck in a cycle of consumerism – earning money to buy stuff I didn’t really need, which wasn’t making me happy.
Giving up spending for a year was an extreme approach, but the aim was to embrace extreme frugality, shake up my spending habits and overpay my mortgage instead of shopping. I could continue to pay my bills, including mortgages, utilities, broadband, phone bill, charity donations, life insurances, money to help my family and basic groceries.
I’ve learned to shop for food in a better way than I did before – I have planned meals, batch-cooked and improved my dire cooking skills slightly. My husband agreed to do the grocery part of the challenge with me this year and we reduced our weekly shop (which covered three meals each a day, toiletries and house cleaning products) to £31.60 a week.
There were two instances in the last year when I had to put my hand in my pocket. The first was on a cycling holiday when I spent £1.95 on a bag of chips because there was nothing to eat in the only local shop except for pork pies. The second was when my next door neighbour – who didn’t know I was on a no-spending challenge – had given a roofer the OK to fix a missing tile between our terrace house and his. The work had already been done and the roofer paid. It cost £100 and we owed him £50 so I paid up. I’m not too upset by the fact I’ve paid out £51.95 all year.
I’m not going to pretend it was easy, especially in the first few months when I tried to live my old life without money and found it wasn’t working. There were plenty of times I wanted to abandon it and indulge in some retail therapy, buy a pint in the pub, or even just purchase a bus ticket instead of getting on my bike for another journey.
But I realised I just had to find new ways to have fun that didn’t include putting my hand in my pocket and defaulting to the pub. Using sites such as Eventbrite I have been to film screenings, wine tasting evenings and theatre productions for free. I’ve also used SRO Audiences to see comedy shows and TV programmes being filmed, and none of it cost me anything.
Living in London I have a wealth of free cultural activities on my doorstep and I’ve been to more art exhibitions this year than ever before – my favourite being First Thursdays, where 150 galleries in east London open late and hold private views and talks.
I even managed a free holiday, cycling the Suffolk and Norfolk coast and camping on beaches. It’s something I’d never done before and probably wouldn’t have, were it not for the challenge – and now I can’t wait to go again next year.
There were lows, such as when I missed gigs and blockbuster films. And I’ve not been able to join friends when they have gone out for a nice meal. There have also been some awkward moments when I’ve turned up to a friend’s house for dinner empty-handed because I couldn’t buy a bottle of wine as a thank you. I did a lot of washing up at my friends’ houses this year as a way of saying thanks for feeding me.
After my expenses were met, I started overpaying my mortgage. We also took in a lodger, and my savings and their rent have helped us pay off an extra 10% of our loan.
Paying off a large chunk of the mortgage has made me realise that I don’t have to stay indebted to the bank for another 25 years like it wants me to and that I have an option to pay it off earlier. By getting rid of my mortgage faster I not only cut the amount of time I spend paying it off but also the interest I pay to the bank.
I’m grateful to have disposable income to save and feel I should make the most of it – I hope I have encouraged other people to reconsider their spending patterns too. I would like to say thank you to those who engaged with me on social media to say they were enforcing their own spending bans whether on clothes or a month-long ban – they all helped me keep my resolve.
That’s not to say that everyone was happy about my experiment, with some accusing me of poverty tourism, but there is a big difference between poverty and frugality. This experiment was not about living in poverty because poverty isn’t a choice. I could still pay my mortgage, bills and food. The last year has been an experiment in extreme frugality and choosing not to buy, rather than not having a choice.
Despite the awkward moments and missing out, this year has been the shove I needed to try new things. The best thing about the challenge is that I’ve been willing to say ‘yes’ more and that I’ve become more adventurous.Having the choice to spend, or not, is a privilege and I have become far more aware of why we buy. I have come to realise that consumerism keeps us chained to our desks, working to earn money to spend on stuff we think will make our lives better. And when the stuff doesn’t make us happy, we go back to work to earn more money to buy something else. The last 12 months have allowed me to step outside this cycle and I can honestly say I’m happier now. I’ve gained confidence and skills, done things I would never have done and met lovely people I wouldn’t have otherwise met.
Many people have said to me, “I bet you can’t wait to get down the shops and have a splurge”, but in all honesty, I’m not interested in hitting the shops. There are a few practical items I need to replace, such as jeans and trainers, and my bike could do with a decent service but that’s about it. I have one more day of no spending to get through and after that there are just two things I will be buying this weekend: a round of drinks for my friends and family to say thanks for their support, followed by a flight to see my grandad in Ireland.
A year of no spending has taught me what things I really need, and it really isn’t that much.
There were lots of big events and nights out I expected to miss out on, but there were some small, more everyday items that I hadn’t expected to miss quite so much.
From Essex to Fife, these properties near golf courses offer plenty of opportunities to practise your swing
Why fork out for membership fees when you could sell your Home Counties semi and buy your own 18-hole golf course and cafe. Home becomes a beamed three-bedroom house with a two-bedroom bungalow for overspill. Experienced golfers may lack stimulus for this is a 10-acre pitch and putt course aimed at amateurs. Asking price: £680,000. Rightmove 01872 490029
Retailers have rung up another record Black Friday, but high streets remained calm as shoppers opted to hunt for bargains on mobile phones and computers.
The association for online retailers, IMRG, estimated that £1.27bn was spent on Friday, up 16% on last year. It will be the busiest day in a week of promotions expected to deliver online retail sales of £6.77bn in the seven days to Monday 28 November.
In the six years since Black Friday first arrived in the UK, the action has shifted away from high street stores. Widely reported scuffles in stores in 2014 and the increasing ease of scanning for the best deals via the internet have encouraged bargain hunters to shop on the web.
Tesco opened hundreds of its largest stores at 5am and put on extra security guards and crowd barriers. Sainsbury’s, Debenhams, John Lewis and Currys PC World also opened stores early, but there were few queues.
At Tesco Extra in Streatham, south London, there were only 11 people in the queue when the supermarket opened at 5am – barely outnumbering the security guards.
Some of those queuing had been there since 4.30am and were surprised how few people had turned up compared with last year. One shopper, who bought two TVs, said: “This is quiet, very calm. Last year at Sainsbury’s it was crazy. I thought it would be a real rabble again.” The supermarket’s top selling items included HD TVs, FIFA 17 video games, iPad minis and Google Chromecast devices.
Sainsbury’s in Harringay, north London, was equally quiet and it was about 5.50am before even a small queue gathered outside. One shopper said: “People don’t want to come out because of the fighting. They are doing it all online.”
John Lewis, which racked up the biggest sales week in its 150-year history around Black Friday last year, said overnight sales through its website were ahead of expectations with five orders placed every second. The department store joined a wave of major retailers reporting double digit surges in online sales from midnight through to lunchtime.
The Argos chief executive, John Rogers, said there had been 500,000 visits to its website in the first hour of online trading between midnight and 1pm – up 50% on last year. The company said 80% of its online sales came via mobile phones and its top sellers included iPads, games consoles, Dyson vacuum cleaners and Beats headphones.
Currys PC World said more than 500,000 shoppers had visited its website before 6am with orders up 40% on 2015. Over the day it racked up 13% more visits than last year as shoppers snapped up 241% more fitness monitors and 60% more drones. Paul Martin, UK head of retail at advisory firm KPMG said: “This has been a pretty big event for the online channel, but in the physical environment it seems to have run out of steam.”
Digital agency Salmon said that between midnight and 9am 75% of shopper traffic came via mobile devices and 57% over the day as a whole. It also flagged a spike in the number of overseas shoppers as the weaker pound enhanced the deals on offer in euro or dollar terms.
Nationwide said its shoppers carried out over 2.4m transactions between midnight and 17.30, 31% more than on a normal Friday and 13% up on last Black Friday. Its account holders spent over £115m, up 38% on a normal Friday.
War paint, quotes from Disney films and staff playing table tennis are not what you expect to see at the headquarters of a retailer on Black Friday, but that was the scene at AO World’s base in Bolton on Friday.
According to John Roberts, the chief executive of the online electrical retailer and one of the most outspoken figures in the industry, it is all part of the unique culture that has made AO one of the fastest-growing companies in the UK and shaken up how washing machines, televisions and laptops are sold.
The relaxed – even jovial – atmosphere among the 750 staff at AO Park as they take calls from customers and oversee IT systems is certainly not because the company is having a quiet day. Roberts says he cannot provide details of AO’s sales for Black Friday, but his smile gives it away. “Mega,” is all he says about the performance, meaning forecasts that Black Friday will be AO’s biggest-ever day of sales are almost certain to be accurate.
The war paint is on the faces of some staff who have tried to find a light-hearted way to motivate themselves on a crucial day for British retailers, and there are inspirational quotes all over the walls of the building, including “Just keep swimming” from Disney’s Finding Nemo. Staff play table tennis during their breaks in the staff cafeteria, which includes a pool table and its own Starbucks.
Roberts says AO’s treatment of employees and its high standards of customer service are down to common sense. “Offer a good service then work out how to make money on it,” says the 43-year-old, who founded AO 16 years ago. “There is an incorrect belief in this country that you can build something amazing for free. It is not going to happen, and it doesn’t happen in five minutes.”
On Black Friday, this approach means ensuring the website does not crash, shoppers aren’t forced to wait to access it, and orders are delivered on time – all common problems for the online operations of traditional high-street retailers.
“It is incomprehensible how that [websites breaking] could happen,” Roberts says.
The AO boss insists the deals available on Black Friday are “fantastic” – despite claims from consumer groups that retailers are exaggerating discounts – and that Brexit has made the shopping event even more attractive for shoppers this year due to the looming threat of inflation.
“Inflation is going to kick in in the new year. Nobody knows to quite what level yet, but you don’t have a 15% change that has stuck in currency and it not translate into pricing,” he says. “Everyone is working very hard to minimise the impact for customers for very obvious reasons, but it is coming. So if you want something, the next few days is a great time to buy a high-ticket product.”
However, Roberts criticises claims by other retailers that they are matching the prices of their rivals, particularly John Lewis’s “never knowingly undersold” campaign, which does not apply to online-only retailers such as AO or Amazon.
“So my principle is, let’s just be honest. Our price match is very simple, which is we match anyone, anywhere, anytime on anything. I don’t think it can get much more simple than that. I can’t understand how some retailers would exclude certain things. So over 50% of all orders placed today will be placed online. How can you [John Lewis] exclude that channel?
“They [never knowingly undersold] are three very definitive words in my view. I don’t care what the short-term cost is, because I am building a long-term relationship with you. You think about it and you think: are they not trying to build a long-term relationship? I don’t understand it.
“Our view is very much to focus on our own business. If they are undermining long-term value with their customers, that has got to be good for us. I think the consumer is ever more educated – the internet is the most price-transparent place to shop. 
“I mean, go and look at their [John Lewis] service reviews on Trust Pilot. You look at all those metrics and the reality will catch the rhetoric, it always does. Whether it is hubris or whatever it is, it catches up. Look at BlackBerry: not long ago they had 50% of the global smartphone market, now they have got less than 1%. They weren’t paranoid about all the fundamentals of their business. We sometimes use examples like Kodak didn’t invent the digital camera, or Blockbuster didn’t invent Netflix, or Tesco didn’t invent Ocado, or Walmart didn’t invent Amazon.”
Roberts says the dramatic changes in technology and how we shop are still being underestimated. AO believes 50% of electrical sales in Europe will be online within 10 years, and it wants 40% of that market.
“Businesses aren’t awake to it,” he says. “If you look at the last three years, mobile shopping has gone from virtually nowhere to over 50% of our traffic. Fortunately, we did see that coming and we did invest in it. But if we didn’t, we would have been massively damaged. So we have got to be thinking, what’s next, what’s next, what’s next?”
According to the very first words in your front-page story (Chancellor to crack down on letting fees, 23 November) “millions of families” are to be offered relief from spurious letting charges. Funny, I hadn’t realised that the measure was targeted only at families – I guess this must mean that people living alone, house-sharers and childless couples will have to go on paying the fees? Can you please make an effort not to bandy about the word “families” as though it were a synonym for “people”?
Rob Sykes
Oxford
• I was leaning on a gate the other day, looking at the view, trying to figure out why November can often seem the best autumn month. Paul Evans expressed these feelings so beautifully (Country Diary, 23 November). Wonderful!
Nick Spencer
Kington, Herefordshire
• I was intrigued by the term “Ukip doner” in your piece “Farage fans toast golden year” (24 November, early editions). Given that Ukip and fellow Brexiters have thoroughly kebabbed much of the economy, is this an example of a Freudian typo?
Brian Price
Weston-super-Mare, Somerset
• “Scientists alarmed at record Arctic temperatures” (Report, 23 November). Why are our politicians not alarmed?
David Hurry
Hurstpierpoint, West Sussex
• The far right is getting a lot of press these days – a lot more coverage than movements around which people can resist this drift to the right. Words like “dismay”, used to describe the feelings of the unfeeling, dismay me. The far right are “not happy”, “disgruntled”, “angry”. I don’t want to know about their “dismay” (Donald Trump’s ‘alt-right’ supporters express dismay at disavowal, theguardian.com, 23 November). I don’t want to find myself inadvertently feeling sorry for them.
Victoria Trow
Totnes, Devon
• I scanned your online front page on Friday: uncontrollable climate change, impossible crises, Brexit, Trump et al. I’d like to congratulate your staff on just getting up in the morning.
Robert Dobson
Tenterden, Kent
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
What’s going for it? St Albans is a Goldilocks kind of place: it’s just right. Old (one of Britain’s oldest settlements), but not over-preserved. Not too frantic and urban, not too dull and commutery. Dense, but green and verdant. The city centre is a historical delight, high on a hill and folded into Verulamium park, bursting with Roman remains and ancient trees. Not too big, not too small. Technically speaking, it’s a city, with a ma-hoo-sive cathedral abbey (including England’s longest nave, trivia geeks) and the cultural heft of a city; its beer festival is a sight to behold. But you can walk to the city limits. It’s perfectly positioned not too far away from anywhere in particular, 20 minutes’ journey from central London, cupped by the M1 and the M25. Mum and Dad moved here in the mid-1960s; Let’s Move To… must be in the genes. This is where I began life in a starter home on a suburban cul-de-sac at the edge of town. Four decades on, though, there’s only one teeny tiny problem: the property prices. Just wrong.
The case against Some people might call it Posh Watford. How dare they.
Well connected? Trains: a dozen or so an hour at peak times to London St Pancras (19-34 minutes), and six or so north to Luton (about 15 minutes) and Bedford (40 minutes). Driving: on a good day, it’s an hour into central London. Plus you’re 10 minutes’s drive from the M25 and M1; half an hour to Luton and its airport; and about 45 minutes to Heathrow airport.
Schools Great. Primaries: among many good, Cunningham Hill, Oakwood, Fleetville, Ss Alban & Stephen Catholic, Skyswood, Bernards Heath, Abbey CofE and my old school Maple are “outstanding”, says Ofsted. Secondaries: Marlborough, Verulam and Townsend CofE are “good”, with Beaumont , Sandringham, St Albans Girls’ and Loreto College “outstanding”.
Hang out at… A fine selection of boozers, such as the Six Bells and the Foragers, plus good food at Thompson and Lussmanns.
Where to buy This is prime commuter territory; get in anywhere you can. Large detacheds and town houses, £800,000-£2.25m. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £600,000-£800,000. Semis, £400,000-£975,000. Terraces and cottages, £325,000-£675,000. Flats, £200,000-£450,000. Rentals: a one-bedroom flat, £750-£1,100pcm; a three-bedroom house, £1,200-£2,250pcm.
Bargain of the week Two-bedroom postwar terrace, in need of updating, £365,000, with JW & Co through rightmove.co.uk.
Bill Howard “The Odyssey cinema. Waited years for it to be restored. One screen, comfy chairs, tables and a few sofas. Best of all: the bar is open throughout the film.”
• Live in St Albans? Join the debate below. Do you live in Durham? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 29 November.
Thousands of families with disabled children have lost out on up to £4,400 a year in tax credits after an administrative blunder by the authorities.
The error in processing their claims meant an estimated 28,000 families whose children qualified for disability living allowance (DLA) during 2011-14 missed out on an additional tax credit premium of between £60 and £84 a week.
The government revealed in the autumn statement this week that it had set aside £360m over six years to ensure these families receive child disability tax credits in future. However, the payments will be backdated only to April, meaning individual families may have lost out on entitlements totalling up to £20,000 over the past five years.
The non-payment of the tax credit premiums appears to have been a result of the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) failing to inform HMRC about families’ eligibility for the award over a three-year period.
The charity Contact a Family called for a compensation fund to be set up to help the families, saying it was not their fault that they lost out on what collectively amounted to tens of millions of pounds in entitlements.
“One thing is certain: this isn’t the fault of families. When you tick a box on a government form indicating you are in receipt of tax credits you reasonably expect it’s there for a reason – and there’s a process in place that allows government departments to share this information,” said the charity’s head of policy and public affairs, Una Summerson.
Families who are responsible for a disabled child or young person are eligible for a higher rate of child tax credit if the child is in receipt of a disability benefit such as disability living allowance (DLA) or personal independence payment (Pip).
Although it is technically the responsibility of the claimant to inform HMRC directly that they receive DLA or Pip for their child, in practice the tax authorities have endeavoured to update the claim automatically using information supplied by the DWP.
When a family applies to the DWP for a disability benefit on behalf of their child, the form asks whether they are in receipt of tax credits. If they state that they are, and the application is approved, the DWP would normally pass the information directly to HMRC.
HMRC regards the data-share as an “extra safeguard” to ensure that the extra child disability amounts are paid even when claimants have not directly notified them they were in receipt of the benefit.
However, between 2011-2014 a processing error described officially as “a gap in the data feed between DWP and HMRC” meant awards were not automatically updated.
Despite the large sums of money involved, the tax credits correction was referred to without explanation in the main Treasury autumn statement report, with only sketchy details of the error buried in a supporting document on policy costings.
Robin Williamson, technical director of the pressure group Low Incomes Tax Reform Group, said: “The amounts payable for disabled and severely disabled children within child tax credit are significant and it is concerning that such a large number of people have missed out on claiming these payments potentially for a number of years.
“It is important that HMRC work closely with DWP to ensure that the data feed works in future so this situation does not happen again.
“Although the claimant has a legal obligation to report changes to their circumstances, we often encounter claimants who quite reasonably assume that this kind of information is shared within and between government departments. This is certainly happening more frequently and means there is a confusing landscape for claimants and a mismatch between the legal framework and the operational practice,” he said.
Summerson said: “We are pleased with the announcement that, for these families, their awards will be amended and the extra amount paid from April 2016. This is something we’ve been campaigning on.”
The error occurred during a period of intense upheaval at the DWP when the then work and pensions secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, was pushing through over 30 separate reforms including universal credit while at the same time cutting the department’s administrative budget by 18% and reducing staffing by nearly a quarter.
A National Audit Office report, published in 2015, was critical of some aspects of the DWP’s handling of what the department described as the “most fundamental change to the social security system in 60 years”. The report noted that: “Recent reforms have stretched the department’s ability to manage programmes”.
Amazon reported brisk online sales as a result of its latest deals, as part of its extended Black Friday sale which started on 14 November and with new offers launched every day since. The top deals running today include discounts on bestselling Alexa ‘hands-free’ devices Amazon Echo and Echo Dot, with Echo available for just £119.99, and Echo Dot available for just £39.99. 
Doug Gurr, Amazon’s UK country manager, commented: “We’ve had a very positive customer response to the thousands of deals during our extended 12 day Black Friday Sale and customers have been snapping up lots of our great deals on offer since midnight. 
From the company’s Peterborough distribution warehouse Paul Firth, Amazon’s head of music, said health and beauty products and toys were also doing well. Three of the top five best-selling items in its sports section were Fitbit Flex activity trackers (up to 50% off) while electric tootbrushes (up to 76% off) accounted for three of the top five beauty items.
Star Wars toys and games were also snapped up, alongside the Disney Rapunzel doll with glowing hair. Like other retailers Amazon has completely sold out of this year’s must-have toy, Hatchimals. “People are also buying practical and essential things such as PC memory cards and wi-fi extenders” Firth said.
Last year in the UK Amazon sold 7.4 million items on Black Friday - 86 items every second. “It’s too early to tell what the picture is” Firth added. “But it certainly all looks very busy. Busy, but ordered….” At Peterborough, the 1,000 staff had been bolstered by another 2,000 to ensure no hitches with picking and packing during this key trading period.
Retailers are reporting a strong start to Black Friday trading as millions of Britons logged on in the early hours to snap up bargains and again on their way to work.
John Lewis said overnight sales through its website were ahead of expectations as shoppers placed five orders every second. The most soughtafter items included Sonos Play 1 wireless speakers, with one sold every 10 seconds, and Marc Jacobs perfume, it said.
“Sales on johnlewis.com exceeded expectations overnight,” said Dino Rocos, operations director at John Lewis, who added: “We have carefully planned for this year’s Black Friday event to ensure orders can be fulfilled without compromising customer service.”
In the six years since Black Friday arrived in the UK the action has shifted from high street stores to become a predominantly online event. The association for online retailers, IMRG, thinks £1.27bn will be spent online today, up 16% on last year. It will be the busiest day in a week of promotions that is expected to deliver online retail sales of £6.77bn in the seven days to Monday 28 November.
According to Nationwide its customers spent £33.9m between midnight and 10am, up 57% on a normal Friday. More than 630,353 transactions were completed during this period, it said, a 40% increase on Black Friday last year.
John Lewis said that is busiest period to date had been between 8am and 8.30am as people shopped on their way to work. Sales through mobile phones were up by more than fifth between 8am and 9am, it said.
Argos chief executive John Rogers said there had been 500,000 visits to its website in the first hour of online trading between midnight and 1pm – up 50% on last year. The company said its top sellers included iPads, games consoles, Dyson vacuum cleaners and Beats headphones.
Rogers said the company was better prepared for Black Friday than last year after rigorously testing its systems, but there were reports of outages during that busy first hour. Last year the websites of several major retailers, including Argos, crashed due to the volume traffic, and in the early hours of today shoppers reported glitches on the Currys PC World and Tesco sites.
Sebastian James, chief executive of Currys PC World owner Dixons Carphone, said: “UK stores and online very busy so far. Our deals are the strongest ever.”
Although stores such as Currys PC World, Sainsbury’s and Tesco opened their doors early, turnout around the country appeared low as stores – many of which had been running deals for several days – struggled to compete with the welter of online deals. Currys PC World said more than 500,000 shoppers had visited its website before 6am with orders, up 40% on 2015.
Diane Wehrle, an analyst at Springboard which tracks shopper numbers, said she expected fewer people to visit high streets and shopping centres on Friday, despite the lure of discounts, with footfall down 7% and 5% respectively on last year.
“Though shopping centres in general have performed less well than the high street this year, they tend to fare better on Black Friday due to having multiple retailers all under one roof which offer larger discounts,” she said.
One area that is expected to buck the trend is London’s West End. Steven Medway, operations director at New West End Company, said it expected stores in the area to ring up sales of £115.5m on Friday, up 5% on last year, as tourists flock to the area.
“We are seeing more international visitors coming into the West End to shop with the pound being lower,” said Medway. “Based on footfall and sales data we [the West End] have been outperforming the rest of the UK since the Brexit vote in June.
“The queues are less obvious, because the discounts run over the weekend. As a result you don’t see the panic buying of the early years [of Black Friday],” added Medway.
Shoppers seek out the best bargains at the discount event that began in the US but has been adopted around the world
The UK may be ringing up its biggest Black Friday yet, but a growing band of retailers are putting a different spin on the US-inspired discount day.
Outdoor brands Patagonia and Braintree, as well as fashion chain Fat Face, will be donating proceeds from the day to charity while Jigsaw and Next have both announced they will not be offering discounts. Meanwhile Berghaus is encouraging its customers to head outdoors as an alternative to the shopping frenzy.
Patagonia will be donating its entire global sales income from its own website and stores on 25 November to 80 grassroots environmental organisations around the world, including Surfers against Sewage and London Waterkeeper in the UK.
“As people think generously about family and friends, we also want to help our customers show love to the planet, which badly needs a gift or two,” the company said. Patagonia funds environmental groups by handing over 1% of its sales. 
It added: “During a difficult and divisive time, we felt it was important to go further and connect more of our customers, who love wild places, with those who are fighting tirelessly to protect them.”
Braintree will be donating half of sales via its website on Black Friday to the refugee council and a second charity to be voted on by shoppers.
John Snare, founder of the brand which was set up in Australia and is now based in London, said: “Black Friday doesn’t sit well with us as a business but it’s impossible to ignore. This is our way of participating without compromising our values and is a very good opportunity to support some important causes.”
For the second year in a row, Fat Face will run its Thanks for Giving campaign in which it donates 10% of net profits over the Black Friday weekend to charities local to its stores. Last year the company handed out just under £200,000. This year the company has already committed to donating at least £100,000 and says it is determined to raise more than last year.
“Fat Face believes passionately that the retail industry can act as a force for good,” the company said.
Berghaus is taking a completely different approach to the weekend. The outdoor brand is offering 1,000 prizes that can only be claimed by solving a series of clues and visiting locations around the UK – the Get Out Game.
Richard Leedham, the Berghaus brand president, said: “Rather than indulge in the discount shopping mayhem, we think that a healthier alternative – for body and soul – is to explore the outdoors. We appreciate that some people might need an incentive to do that, which is where the Get Out Game comes in.”
Jigsaw said it would not be participating in Black Friday this year after research indicated increasing cynicism about the promotional day among shoppers.
Peter Ruis, chief executive of the Jigsaw Group, said: “Black Friday warps our perception of what’s valuable and important. Has that product being offered at 20% off been designed to offset the price decrease? Has the supplier had pressure put on them to take the hit? Was it always meant to be at that price anyway and been ‘price established’ higher?”
“We buy products for their quality and craft, and quite simply because we love them. We want them to be ethically sourced. We want them honestly priced. That defines our perception of absolute value.”
From Essex to Fife, these properties near golf courses offer plenty of opportunities to practise your swing
Many seats on Ryanair flights could be free in a decade, with the airline making its money from sharing revenues with airports, boss Michael O’Leary said this week. But of course, flying isn’t – and won’t really be – free.
The average cost to Ryanair of carrying a passenger is €47.69 (£40.71 at current exchange rates), according to the company’s 2016 annual report, while the average cost of a ticket is €46.67 (£39.85). That’s a loss of around £1 on every ticket it sells. But it was able to record a large profit because it made around £1bn from “ancillary revenues” – in other words, baggage charges, priority boarding, sandwiches and drinks sold on board, travel insurance and so on. It turns out the average traveller spends €14.74 on extras, which is where the real money is.
So if you really want to be a low-cost traveller, the trick is to avoid all the things Ryanair tries to sell you.
Ryanair charges £15-£22.50 each way, on top of the normal fare, if you want to reserve a seat in rows one and two, or 16 and 17 by the emergency exits, as they have extra legroom.
Most other seats on Ryanair are charged at an extra £8 each way. Yet frequent travellers know a trick that works most of the time, whereby they obtain a premium seat without paying extra.
During the booking process you will be asked to reserve a seat. Just click “no thanks”. Ryanair will subsequently send out emails to remind you to check in, and imploring you to pay for a reserved seat.
Ignore them. The best time to check in is between two and three hours before your flight. In most cases you will then automatically be allocated one of the £15 premium seats. Crucially, make sure you complete check-in before the final two-hour deadline. After that, you will have to do it at the airport, at a cost of £45.
Why does this work? We have not had this confirmed by Ryanair, but the thinking is that it does not sell all its premium seats, but does fill most of its aircraft. It keeps the premium seats open until the last possible moment.
But the final few checking in have to be seated somewhere, so they are rewarded with one of the empty premium seats.
The problem with this trick is that it is not guaranteed and, crucially, only really works for solo travellers. If you are in a group then it will mean you are almost certainly split up.
Ryanair told us: “While we welcome enterprising ideas, it’s important to note that our load factor for October was 95%, and the only way for customers to guarantee their preferred seat is to purchase a reserved seat.”
We all know (or should by now) that you can’t take more than 100ml of liquid through security. On board, Ryanair capitalises on this by charging a stiff €3/£2.56 to thirsty travellers who want a bottle of water. But all you have to do is pack an empty plastic bottle and fill it up at a water fountain after security in the airport terminal. Some airports, presumably at the behest of retailers, will hide the water fountain as best they can, but there usually is one. At Gatwick’s south terminal it is on the upstairs concourse, down a corridor leading to the toilets. And there’s nearly always a savvy traveller there topping up their bottle.
Those dinky wine bottles can also be found for £2.50 in duty-free before flying, although Ryanair rules say you can’t drink your own alcohol on board. Of course, once on board it will sell you wine at €6-€7 per mini-bottle.
The same goes for snacks. You are perfectly free to carry fruit, vegetables and all solid foods through security in your hand baggage, although soup will breach the rules. Sandwiches on board Ryanair cost €4.50, but you can make some at home before: Ryanair says you are free to take your own food. And a 250g bag of M&Ms is €4/£3.40 on its flights, but a 300g bag bought at Asda costs £2.
A 15kg bag costs £10-£40 each way, and another £5 or £10 if it’s 20kg. Above that, each kilo costs another tenner. Unless it’s the depths of winter and you need heaps of clothes, Ryanair’s free baggage allowance, though mean, should get you through: you are allowed a free 10kg hand luggage bag – the size of a small wheelie – plus a further small bag. Ryanair representatives used to have a stormtrooper reputation for seizing vaguely oversized bags, weighing them and charging accordingly, but in recent years have become more lenient.
Martin Lewis from MoneySavingExpert demonstrated on the ITV Tonight programme how to squash a vast amount of stuff into your jacket or coat. Wearing a 22-pocket SCOTTeVEST US survivalist jacket, he managed to squeeze in a laptop, two books, a towel, passports, a T-shirt, socks, magazines and much more. “Even though it was heavier than hand luggage, airlines don’t have rules to stop it … yet,” he said.
It remains a mystery to frequent travellers why so many people opt for priority boarding, which will be £10 on a Ryanair return. It is not uncommon for priority customers to be first down the steps to be greeted by a bus waiting on the tarmac … but when the bus doors open it’s a free-for-all.
Some people opt for priority to ensure space in the luggage rack, but it can be easier, and faster, to leave your wheelie bag on the tarmac to be put in the hold, for free, and then collect it on arrival.
Ryanair’s hotel booking service is provided by Booking.com and its car hire by Cartrawler.com, which pays a commission to the airline. We thought that might mean it’s cheaper to buy separately. But when we tested prices for hotels in Dublin for a weekend, we found that a stay at the Jurys Inn was actually cheaper through Ryanair’s website than anything we could find on comparison site Trivago, while the cars were £1-£2 less.
Shoppers hunting Black Friday bargains sparked a surge in online sales during the small hours but left high street stores looking deserted compared with the frantic scramble of previous years.
Retailers’ most eagerly awaited day of the year has increasingly been moving on to the web and the trend showed no signs of abating as online stores started racking up sales from midnight.
John Rogers, the new chief executive officer of Argos, told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme there had been 500,000 visits to the retailer’s website in the first hour of online trading between midnight and 1pm – up 50% on last year.
He said he expected traffic to peak between 7am and 10am as people shop on their mobile phones on their way to work.
Rogers predicted that Argos would take 70% or more of its orders onlinetoday compared with 50% during normal trading, and that the company was better prepared for Black Friday than last year after rigorously testing its systems.
Online retailers have this year taken extra precautions to prevent online meltdown and overloaded websites crashing.
Currys PC World’s Black Friday 2016 deals webpage suffered problems just after midnight, according to tweets from furious “early bird” shoppers. The first UK bargain-hunters reported frustratingly slow loading times and pages timing out.
“Currys how is this happening?” one user tweeted. Another posted: “bit of a joke you being currys pcworld and your website crashing. Remind me never to go to you for a PC!”
A spokeswoman said: “Currys PC World’s website experienced a few issues for a short period of 15 minutes just after midnight. The majority of customers were still able to access the site and place orders but we understand that some shoppers had problems loading the pages.
“This was quickly rectified and we have had no further reported issues. We’ve already seen over half a million visitors to the site between midnight and 6am this morning (with orders up 40% for the same period last year) with the Google Chromecast, Samsung Galaxy Tablets and JVC 32in TVs being the most popular items for shoppers.”
While online retailers were busy, stores were off to a slow start. At the Tesco Extra in Streatham, south London, there were only 11 people in the queue when the supermarket opened at 5am – barely outnumbering the security guards.
Some of those queuing had been there since 4.30am and were surprised how few people had turned up compared with last year.
Tony was queuing up for a “must-have” Hatchimal toy after being unable to get one for his children online. “I’ll either go home a hero or if they haven’t got one I’ll be home in bed in half an hour,” he told the Guardian.
Most of those in the queue were planning to pick up a TV from the large pile just inside the door. But it was more of a saunter than a scramble once the doors opened.
Michael, who bought two TVs, said: “This is quiet, very calm. Last year at Sainsbury’s it was crazy. I thought it would be a real rabble again.” He said he was buying himself a TV for the second year in a row as the one he got last year broke.
Frederic said he’d come along to look at the deals but had not bought anything.
“Last year there was a big queue and we had to call a car. We got a TV and a microwave. This time it’s too small. There’s not something I need, it’s just TVs and coffee machines,” he said.
Martin Francis, the store manager at Tesco in Streatham, said he was expecting sales to build through the day into the afternoon. He said hundreds more TVs would be delivered over the weekend. “It will give us additional spend later on when people come in to do their normal shop,” he said.
Sainsbury’s in Harringay was equally quiet and it was about 5.50am before even a small queue gathered outside. The branch was one of just three the retailer opened early for the sale, and had been closed since midnight in preparation.
Two years ago, the shop was the scene of scuffles and queue jumping, but this year things were very different.
At 5.45am, a huddle of workers were being briefed near the door, but not a single person was waiting. The huge banner urging shoppers to “Hurry, while stocks last” had not persuaded the people of this part of north London to set their alarm clocks.
One woman waiting outside ahead of doors opening said she was there to buy a TV: “I might get something else but my main aim is to get a big TV.” She said this was her first Black Friday. “I wasn’t keen on coming before – I didn’t like the idea of fighting.”
No one else was keen to talk about what they were after. Through the doors a pile of TVs, vacuum cleaners, laptops and Nutri Ninjas was visible, and as the doors opened five minutes early, what little crowd there was made a beeline straight for the stack of goods.
About half an hour later the shop floor was still looking pretty pristine. People who came to the store stopped to take a look, but most just left with what they’d come in for, or nothing.
A couple who formed part of the original queue left with just a bag of groceries. One of the store workers said it had been quiet last year too: “Everyone’s doing their shopping online.”
The TV hunter had loaded a 40-inch Blaupunkt set – down from £220 to £150 – into her trolley, but after 40 minutes she emerged empty handed. She had bought a TV – but one from elsewhere in the store, and she was going to send her son to pick it up. She said she was not surprised the shop was quiet. “People don’t want to come out because of the fighting. They are doing it all online.”
I was 33, overdrawn and single. I hated the hovel of a home I lived in. “Home” is stretching it, really. It was a cold converted garage on the outskirts of well-to-do Winchester, five miles up the road from the safe Southampton suburb where I had grown up.
Everything I had taken for granted as a child was sadly lacking from my life: a garden, my own front door, security and the sense of belonging that family breeds. Mice – or were they rats? – clambered around in the loft and cavity wall, taunting me as I tried to sleep, alone, comforted by the sounds of The Smiths and the Stone Roses, songs that reminded me of happier student days in Manchester.
On waking, I would drive a few miles up the road to phone it in at the poorly paid university admin job I’d worked in for seven years. Many of those years had been spent trying to escape, unsuccessfully, to the kind of salary my successful friends commanded. A large and ultimately unhealthy part of my life after university had in fact been spent comparing myself with friends – those in my life and those from school, who I heard about on the real or Facebook grapevine.
It was 2014, and I was going nowhere.
Perhaps I had myself to blame. I had chosen cheap housing that enabled me to live alone, because I really didn’t want to share with strangers after a traumatising experience living with an alcoholic. Ironic, really, as beer had become my crutch, seeing me through the lonely nights. It was certainly my downfall too, when it came to meeting the woman of my dreams or, in fact, any woman. Any charm, wit and intelligence I had used to bag my one girlfriend in my mid-20s was lost every time I got drunk. Tinder and real life were equally doomed affairs.
As my one glimmer of hope – a journalism course – came to an end, I was searching for new ideas and recalled something I’d written in my teens: a letter to my future self. I’d written it for a school project (English, probably) in 1994, and the plan was for it to stay sealed until 2014. I remember wanting to open it in the years immediately after school, but Mum wouldn’t let me. For the last decade or so, the envelope had just been gathering dust at my parents’ house and I’d pretty much forgotten about it.
An idea was born. I would open the letter and track down those old school friends who were mentioned as “mates” at the time, and find out whether their lives had gone according to plan. Part of my motivation was to reconnect and understand why we’d lost touch, but I also wanted to know if they too had felt the kind of pain I had – the sadness, despair and loneliness.
I certainly hadn’t achieved the hopes I’d articulated back then. I wasn’t a millionaire or married to the girl at school who I’d fancied. I also wasn’t the “very respectable bank manager” my teacher had predicted I would become.
Opening the envelope on film for “Dear John” – as the project became known – was a surprise, as I genuinely couldn’t remember what I’d written. I thought it was just one letter to my future self but it turned out to be a series of letters which took me right back to growing up in Chandler’s Ford and all the people in my life back then.
The letters lurched from fairly trivial matters, like the time I spent back then walking my dog, Sadie, to a description of my “fantasy home”, full of everything I wanted in 1994: a Sony Mega Drive, jacuzzi, 30 jumpers and a fax. Then there were the heartfelt emotions I expressed when describing three people who had influenced me: my mum, my dad and one of my classmates.
The digital age helped massively with tracking down my long-lost friends. A Google here, a Facebook there often did the job. Contacting old friends via email, Facebook or LinkedIn, I tried to be clear about my intentions, explaining that I’d like to film our conversation, and to tactfully explore the hopes and dreams they’d had back then, to explore how they had changed with time, and why.
With a little gentle persuasion I lined up five interviews, and we slipped back into gear pretty easily. The conversations were long and sprawling as I had so many questions. My old friends spoke candidly about their lives and experiences: from divorces to cancer, they’d been dealt some cruel hands; but it was how they had approached life and coped with adversity that made me think.
In the early 1990s my father suffered kidney failure, which led to a life of dialysis and deteriorating health. Occasionally angry, often annoyed, I had struggled to understand and cope with this. Speaking to the classmate who had influenced me all those years before, discussing how he had handled his father passing away at a young age, really opened my eyes. I was keen to know what a life without a father was like and remember telling him, as we hugged at the end of our chat, that the conversation had been therapeutic.
When it came to success in life and love, for people like us who had been lucky enough to grow up in a relatively prosperous, stable environment, one quality shone through: confidence. These men had grown through their experiences and gone on to achieve great success. They had found a direction, a sense of satisfaction and self-worth in their jobs and growing families.
From the dating coach to the international businessman, confidence had helped them greatly on their paths. Comfortable in their own skin, they backed themselves and had what I wanted, what I needed: well-paid jobs, strong relationships, a place to call home.
The whole experience affected me profoundly. I knew I must back myself as I continued through life, and become comfortable with being uncomfortable. With the advantages I had, only I could change things. I consigned to the past my own self-pity, thinking the world owed me a favour, and letting rejections drag me down.
I took some action and applied for three jobs at one organisation. Undeterred by rejection one and two I rocked up to interview three and now find myself in a much better job than I had before, which challenges me and has enabled me to develop massively. The pay has helped too with sorting out my debts, and I’ve even managed a holiday or two. And through freelancing as a journalist I have found my missing purpose, direction and satisfaction.
I’m also about to celebrate a two-year anniversary with my partner. One we might just celebrate in our own home. Whether we’ll ever have that fax and Megadrive, only time will tell.
Underemployed actor Chuck McCarthy started people walking earlier this year, when he needed to bring in some extra cash to pay the bills. The idea to charge $7 (£5.60) a mile to walk with people, inspired by the dog walking and personal training posters in his Los Angeles neighbourhood, started as a joke but gained traction due to an enthusiastic response. 
McCarthy now walks up to 15 people a month and makes around $600 doing so. Although acting is still his main focus, he has since trademarked the people walking idea, launched an app, is looking into franchising, and released a company T-shirt and mug.
Finding ways to improve cashflow can present a major challenge for many small businesses and freelancers. Be it insufficient startup capital, late payment from suppliers or unforeseen expenses along the way – cashflow problems can strike even the most successful of businesses. How do savvy entrepreneurs handle the shortfall?
Professional actor, singer and dancer Vanessa Heywood started her business Tiny Mites Music in 2002. She runs music groups and shows for children up to the age of five, led by actors performing her original songs and music, recorded by professional musicians.
The business expanded quickly from daycare nurseries in Heywood’s hometown of Radlett, and twice-weekly classes now take place in 120 nurseries in London and the home counties. But growth has not been without its cashflow issues. “I found myself with a big monthly freelance wage bill to pay all the actors but the nurseries were taking ages to pay lots of small amounts. I needed to think of a new way of earning larger lump sums more easily and quickly,” Heywood says.
She developed Tiny Mites Music classes for holiday parks, which she sold for £50,000 in 2009 to Haven Holidays. The fee included all materials and Heywood trained more than 150 of the holiday park’s staff to perform the shows.
Then in 2014, a conversation with a teacher friend sparked the idea for Pure Imagination Plays, shows and workshops for older children, with large puppets and voiceovers, so that one actor can present a show. Parents were asking for them too so Heywood expanded to offer the plays for parties.
She says: “We usually run four plays a month in schools and the charge for each play is about 10 times the cost of a small Tiny Mites music class. So these larger lump sums really help with the cashflow problem.”
She also employed a part-time book keeper and implemented a computerised system to invoice each nursery at the start of the month, with a reminder two weeks later, which has helped to improve regular payment.
Large companies often take so long to pay that it can cause serious cashflow problems for small businesses, who are owed an estimated £26bn in late payments. Margot James, the small business minister, has pledged to help tackle this by appointing a small business commissioner. Large businesses will also be legally obliged to report on payment practices from 6 April 2017.
It’s an issue that Charlotte Sweeney, who set up diversity and inclusion consultancy Charlotte Sweeney Associates in 2012, has experienced. “Big companies may book six months of full-time consultancy work but often their agreement will involve paying in full, after delivery. It took a year to get paid by one public sector organisation.”
The need for more continuous cashflow inspired Sweeney to launch her new business venture, Creating Inclusive Cultures (CIC), a business forum that focuses on individual cities and their requirements to create more inclusive workspaces.
Each CIC has six events a year in each city plus an app for online videos and webinars. Sweeney has found that developing different programmes and price points has enabled more organisations to work with her in different ways, and although the CICs bring in smaller amounts than her consultancy business, it’s helped create an ongoing cashflow stream. The first CIC launched in Leeds in 2015, followed by Manchester and Birmingham this year – the plan is to expand to more UK cities in the future.
Like Heywood, Sweeney also advises getting organised, digital systems in place to invoice immediately. It’s a lesson that Sarah Garrett, CEO of Square Peg Media learned the hard way.
“Lying awake at night worrying about cashflow can quickly stifle creative thinking” says Sarah Garrett, CEO of Square Peg Media. Garrett launched g3, a lifestyle magazine for lesbian and bisexual women in 2001, and has since grown the business to deliver £2m turnover annually. Square Peg Media now runs exhibitions, conferences, events and online magazines including the annual British LGBT awards.
But the company was nearly brought down at an early stage when it was owed more than £500,000 by suppliers. Garrett says: “I tried refactoring the debt with a bank offering £80,000 of the debt up front, as I thought this would improve cashflow, but it was the worst thing I ever did. If you let the debt build up for too long it gets really messy – we never got all the money back.”
Johnny Martin, the Numbers Coach, an experienced finance director, who runs Get Cash Flow Confident workshops, emphasises the importance of negotiating payment terms. He says: “Always think about when you’re going to get paid, at the time that you’re selling. You can negotiate payment terms in seven days, 14 days or for a 30% deposit up front, for example. And make sure you get the terms of trade agreed to cover the responsibilities on both sides, including things like cancellation terms.”
After her experience, Garrett employed someone to look after financial planning and put stricter credit control processes in place. She adds: “I’d also advise speaking to suppliers early if you are having cashflow problems, to let them know when you will be able to pay realistically as this can go a long way towards alleviating stress all round.”
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
In all the hype around Black Friday, figuring out whether the discount is a good buy or not can be tricky. Which? recently published research showing that out of 178 deals publicised on Black Friday in 2015, only 90 were actually cheaper than they had been before the sale day.
Retailers from Currys to Amazon all mark their Black Friday deals with magnificent-sounding price cuts, but they are only really useful if you know what price they were before the sale started.
The good news is that for Amazon there’s a quick and easy way to work out whether a deal really is a steal. CamelCamelCamel – odd name, great site – logs the price of products on Amazon over time, so you can see historical prices and whether that “50% off” is the cheapest it has ever been.
Plug in your search terms or the link to the Amazon shopping page and hit go. Select the right product and look at the easy to read chart to see if the deep discount is all that good. 
A quick test showed that a 7-inch Fire Tablet at £29.99 was cheaper than previously, while the Reebok ZR8 treadmill was cheaper in January.
Other sites are also available to compare Amazon and other large retailers. One of the easiest to use is Google Shopping – simply search for the product, select the right one and view prices at a collection of retailers to see which is the cheapest.
Perhaps the most useful of tools for comparing retailers is a browser extension called Invisible Hand available for Chrome, Firefox and Safari. The tool sits in your browser and notifies you if a product you’re looking at in one store is available for less in another.
It doesn’t cover every store or product, but Argos, Game, John Lewis, Asda, B&Q, PC Word, Currys, Marks & Spencer, Boots, Very and others are included, as well as a collection of airlines for tickets. It won’t show you whether the discount is any cheaper than it was before the sale, but it will show if it’s currently available for cheaper from somewhere else.
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I am applying for jobs as a school librarian. I hold a master’s degree in information and library studies, and have seven years’ experience working as a school librarian. The last job I applied for, I phoned before sending in my application and asked whether it would be possible to have a look around the library and meet the librarian. The school responded quickly and I visited the following day. I was impressed with the library space and could see by the friendly behaviour of the students that the current librarian was well liked.
I sent her a thank you card after my visit and promptly sent in my application. I was one of seven applicants, but I did not get the job.
There were a number of things we were asked to do on the day of our interview, including being interviewed by a panel of students and two senior members of the school. When it was my turn for the student panel, the librarian was also in the room but she did not acknowledge me. I noticed the students looked to her at one point and I would have looked too, only it seemed rude to turn my attention away from the students. Of the seven applicants, I was rated least liked by the student panel.
Is it no longer appropriate to ask to look around a school library prior to applying for a job being advertised? Or doing what I consider essential research? My feeling is that I do not enhance my chances of being hired by doing so and that I may be creating an atmosphere of mistrust. I am applying for another job in a school library and would have asked to have a look around and perhaps meet the people involved, but I don’t want to lower my chances of being chosen.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally. 
I tried to buy a senior open return ticket from Bath Spa to Paddington using the Great Western Rail website. The fare was advertised at £24, but a further £6 was automatically added at checkout for special delivery mailing without the usual option of collecting the ticket from the station.
Customer services initially told me there was a fault on the website, and then that ticket machines and ticket office computers at stations did not recognise the codes for these tickets so they had to be posted.
In the end I went to the station and bought the same ticket for the same price. Going online today I find that, more than two weeks later, the issue is still there – and there is still no warning advising customers of it. STB, Bath
GWR explains that the ticket you were trying to buy was a discounted offer available until December and says that the web page promoting the deal makes clear that if you book more than five days before the date of travel, tickets are posted for free by second class post, whereas if you are travelling imminently the system defaults to the £6 special delivery. Otherwise, you can buy them on the day from the station but, exasperatingly, you cannot collect pre-paid tickets from there if they are part of the discounted deal.
Obviously, it would be helpful if these facts were repeated on the payment page. GWR says it’s “investigating being able to make subsequent offers available for collection through vending machines or as e-tickets”.
In the meantime, anyone tempted by the offer of 60% off had better make sure they book online a week in advance or get to the station good and early on the day to buy their ticket.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
“The obligation for working parents is a precise one: the feeling that one ought to work as if one did not have children, while raising one’s children as if one did not have a job,” a friend recently wrote on Facebook. My immediate reaction was sadness as it made me think about my own roles as a parent and a senior HR manager. But do we really need to pigeonhole ourselves to be successful?
For me, being a working parent takes its toll. I run out of my last meeting at 4.30pm and dash to the tube. If I miss the train, I have to wait another 15 minutes for the next one. I have to collect Emma, my daughter, from nursery by 6pm and I feel rising anxiety trying to get back on time. I hate it when she’s among the last to be picked up and feel a sense of disappointment in myself.
When returning to work, most parents opt for some sort of flexible arrangement. When I returned to work I wanted to meet the expectations of my peers and managers, while knowing that I was giving my child the best possible start and as much time as I could. But I found it’s not as simple as switching into mum mode the moment I leave the office. I spent my commute on the phone, doing work calls, replying to emails, making every second count before making Emma my primary focus for the next few hours until she fell asleep. After that, I used to be back on my emails finishing my tasks for the day.
I felt I had to justify my new working arrangement by being available all the time, resulting in a sense of frustration that I wasn’t able to give either work or parenting 100%. This was not only exhausting, but impossible to keep up.
So how can you juggle it all in a way that works not only for you, but also those around you?
Be fair to yourself and make sure your manager is aware of what is possible and what isn’t. I don’t work Wednesdays, but of course I would end up working. Although I am part time, my workload has not reduced – in fact, sometimes it’s more. At first I found myself with a relentless need to check my work phone and reply to emails while looking after Emma. This wasn’t feasible and I needed to find a balance. I now have arranged to work two hours from home on that day off. It’s a more realistic an expectation.
Demonstrate how you will re-prioritise your meeting schedules, administration or email management by working such an arrangement to your own advantage and that of the company. Do your best work, follow your passions and be confident in your experience and voice.
Use the support mechanisms in place – they’re there for a reason and leaning on them doesn’t make you any less efficient or effective, quite the opposite. With more than 14 years’ experience in HR, I understand that overcoming the challenges of being a working mum is not something I can do alone. I feel lucky to be working in a supportive environment that embraces my role as a mother and as a senior member of the team.
Don’t allow yourself to get anxious about the unknown when a simple conversation may be all you need to set things straight. Forgive yourself for feeling uncertainty or guilt, as you’re not alone. How accountable you feel depends on the kind of employer you work for and whether or not they have great policies, role models and can adapt to change. We can all get swept up in the way things have always been done rather than creating new ways of working that serve a better purpose in today’s reality.
Back to that original quote: is that how I feel? Perhaps at times, but only when I forget to feel proud of being a successful working mother – one busy, fulfilled person rather than two separate entities. I hope I am not alone in feeling that.
Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs or sign up to Guardian Careers for the latest job vacancies and career advice
 People who live here should beware glass ceilings that could thwart their ambitions. Then there’s the annual budget for a window cleaner. Otherwise, if this Victorian glasshouse in Walworth, Darlington, County Durham, was good enough for tropical plants, it should suit rarified folk with £699,950 to spend. It was built to provide soft fruits for the owners of Walworth Castle, now a hotel and your next-door neighbour. And, from the outside, a ghost gardener would not know that anything has been changed.
Is it too late to change your life? A question for the sleepless small hours, perhaps; for the middle-aged and heavily mortgaged, burnt out or trapped in jobs that were never their dream. So many fantasise about escape, but worry that the chance for all that is long gone; that they’re too weighed down by responsibilities now to throw everything up in the air and start again.
So you could almost hear the sighs of envy when the Financial Times columnist Lucy Kellaway declared she was jacking in her by all accounts delightful job to retrain as a maths teacher in an inner-city comp – and to focus on the organisation she has set up, Now Teach, urging experienced bankers, lawyers and accountants to round off their careers in the classroom too.
At 58 Kellaway’s four children are grown up, she’s financially secure and, as she put it, it seemed like a good time to take a risk. (It may or may not also be relevant that she recently got divorced, for what’s one more upheaval when your life is changing drastically anyway?) Only time will tell how many others she can lure from the City but I’d bet my life plenty of jaded 50-somethings who have lost interest in their jobs will be following her progress keenly.
Ironically some of them will almost certainly be teachers, who would retrain as well-paid and revered FT columnists in a heartbeat if it weren’t for the fact that somehow this always seems to be a one-way street. Giving it all up to teach is becoming a stock answer for people who aren’t sure what else to do with their lives and the breezy implication that teaching is basically an easy fallback option – something anyone could pick up if they chose, rather than an intensely demanding career in which a lifetime’s experience of doing it might come in pretty handy – must be infuriating.
But in fairness to Kellaway, a teacher’s daughter who has seen one of her own daughters in turn train as a teacher, I don’t think she meant it so crassly. When asked about her motives she repeated something her sister, the Observer journalist Kate Kellaway, had said about craving the “luxury of being useful”. It seems she wants to be needed, in a way that writers of amusing columns on corporate culture ultimately aren’t, and frankly who doesn’t want that?
Just ask the newly retired, moping around the house with nothing much to do; or formerly stay-at-home mothers whose children are flying the nest; or indeed anyone out of work and desperately looking for it. If you’re not needed by somebody for something, even if only to cut up their fish fingers or find their lost PE kit, then it’s hard to know quite where you fit or why you matter.
And that’s why every time I hear someone preaching the idea of basic income – money paid by the state to all citizens, regardless of whether they work or not – as a solution to new technology destroying jobs I want to scream, because it’s such a fundamental misunderstanding of the hole work fills in people’s lives or what is lost from a community when any big industry pulls out. Paying people to stay at home may keep them out of poverty but the message it sends is the polar opposite of being needed; sorry, but we can’t think of anything for you to do, so go away and find your own entertainment.
When you’re not working it’s not just the money you miss, it’s the feeling that someone might actually notice if you didn’t get out of bed one morning. Why is Tony Blair suddenly trying to carve out a space for himself in post-Brexit vote public life, when he clearly doesn’t need the money and must know how furiously some will respond? He too apparently craves the luxury of being useful in a crisis, whether or not that’s actually now within his grasp.
The army of born-again teachers Kellaway hopes to lead may also, of course, find being useful harder than it looks. If you’re a lawyer used to people hanging on your every word in court, then facing a roomful of surly 13-year-olds who’d rather listen to anyone but you will not be easy. No doubt some late converts to the classroom, heads filled with romantic fantasies of starring in their own personal Dead Poets Society, will find out soon enough why almost half of newly qualified teachers drop out and why “giving something back” at the end of a long corporate career isn’t necessarily as fun as it sounds.
But all power to Kellaway’s elbow nonetheless, both for trying to make herself personally useful and for starting a long overdue conversation about the nature of work in later life.
In a world where retirement will be increasingly delayed and working life eked out for half a century it makes absolutely no sense to treat anyone over 50 as if they’re coasting downhill to retirement, when the truth is they may have almost two decades of working life left in them. Why shouldn’t people be able to reinvent themselves at this age, to rethink a career choice they might have made 30 years ago and long outgrown or to learn something new?
That holds particularly true perhaps for parents who have for decades put family first and pushed their careers onto the back-burner, only to get a second wind when the kids leave home. And irritating as they may be to those already ground down by experience, starry-eyed older career changers could if nothing else bring fresh energy and perspectives to all sorts of workplaces. To suggest otherwise is dangerously close to sneering that old dogs can’t learn new tricks.
But what makes the process of rethinking later working life urgent is that the window of opportunity opening up now may only be a short one.
Kellaway is lucky that she can afford to take a pay cut now but luckier still to be part of the so-called golden generation, those born when education was free, property relatively cheap and pensions relatively generous – and who therefore have a fighting chance of reaching their 50s with the big debts paid off and the freedom to make different choices.
Being useful in this particular sense is a luxury that may be denied to future generations. Make the most of it while it lasts.
The average cost of a home in London is more than 14 times average earnings – the highest level on record, according to figures from property consultancy Hometrack. Oxford and Cambridge are not far behind, the company’s latest index of city prices indicates, with house prices at 13.5 and 13.6 times local earnings respectively.
A lack of homes for sale combined with demand fuelled by low mortgage rates has pushed up average prices in London by 86% since 2009, according to Hometrack, to an average of £482,000. The increase is far in excess of wage growth and means prices are 14.2 times the average London wage packet of £33,720 a year – the highest multiple since 2002.
Prices in London did falter during the credit crisis but it was not long before they resumed their upwards march. The boom is slowing however, Hometrack said, with the annual rate of growth in the capital falling to 9.1%, and the firm forecasting a further drop to “low single digits” in the next six to 12 months.
The figures highlight how tough the housing market has become for prospective buyers in cities around the UK, with prices in all 20 tracked by Hometrack higher than their post-crash low. In Oxford, prices have increased by 72% since their nadir, to an average of £415,000, while in Cambridge the average has risen by 84% to £420,600 and in Bristol prices are up by 61% at £259,400. Glasgow has shown the smallest increase, with prices 13% above their low at £114,700.
Prices in Glasgow are typically just 3.7 times local earnings, making it one of three cities where the ratio is below its long-run average, Hometrack said. The other two are Liverpool and Newcastle. At £112,700 the average price in Liverpool is 4.4 times earnings, while in Newcastle it is 4.8 times earnings at £122,600.
Richard Donnell, insight director at Hometrack, said he expected Oxford and Cambridge to see falls in growth similar to that in London.
“The impetus for house price growth is shifting from the affordability-constrained cities in southern England to cities in the midlands and the north of England,” he sad. “Regional cities have more attractive affordability levels and house prices have significant potential upside for growth in the near term subject to the outlook for the economy.”
Wednesday’s autumn statement included the announcement of a £2.3bn fund to pay for infrastructure that would unlock sites in areas of highest demand, in a move the government said would enable up to 100,000 more homes to be built.
Donnell said the statement had focused on the longer term challenges of addressing housing supply. “This will have limited impact on the current profile of housing affordability in the near term which will be dictated by market forces and households’ expectations for jobs and the cost of borrowing,” he said.
Figures from the Office for National Statistics indicate that saving for a deposit will get harder for those living in rented accommodation in many parts of Great Britain. The ONS’s latest private rental index suggested that in the year to October private rents in England increased by 2.5% in England, while in Wales they went up by 0.4%. Only Scotland recorded a fall, with rents down by 0.2%.
Rent inflation was highest in the south-east of England, where tenants are paying 3.4% more than a year ago, and lowest in the north-east where costs have gone up by 1.1%.
Culture committee chair writes to Karen Bradley calling for the use of software to harvest tickets for resale to be outlawed
While the chancellor is scratching about like a restless chicken for the odd billion here or there, he ignores the main opportunities for reducing public expenditure. Britain’s welfare system is not designed to help its citizens but its landlords and business owners. £27bn a year goes on housing benefit. None of it sticks to the fingers of tenants. It goes straight to landlords, who raise rents with impunity knowing the state will foot the bill. £30bn goes on working tax credits to supplement the wages of people whose employers refuse to pay them a living wage. Together these benefits account for about a quarter of total welfare costs. They do not benefit poor people at all. Rent controls and the enforcement of minimum wages could cut welfare spending without persecuting poor people and disabled people. Why isn’t Labour proposing this?
David Butler
London
• Rather than tweaking legislation to prevent private landlords and letting agents from making obscene amounts of money from rental properties (Report, 23 November), surely the only genuine solution is to ditch the dogma and return to a national programme of building council housing. However, even in this year of the unexpected, I cannot see common sense making a much-needed comeback.
Ian Grieve
Steyning, West Sussex
• The chancellor has promised extra help for the growing housing crisis in London and elsewhere in England. However, the measures he has put forward will at best make a marginal impact on a housing market in London, where the sale of social housing and the failure to replace it has created a crisis. In Scotland we have banned the sale of social housing, are building 60,000 new social housing units and have regulated private renting. We need tougher measures to regulate rents in the private sector but we are showing that another way is possible. However, I think we need independence for Scotland to get the full control over our economy and budget to make sure that all our social policies are fairer. 
Hugh Kerr
Edinburgh
• It’s very good news for tenants of rented property that the chancellor has announced that he will crack down on the letting fees agents charge them.
In effect, however, agencies charge twice, since they also charge landlords administrative fees for arranging new tenancies, for renewing existing tenancies, and for inventories. These charges are levied on landlords in addition to the percentage of the monthly rent that agencies take for managing landlords’ properties.
Lin Wilkinson
Newbury, Berkshire
• The chancellor made a number of announcements that are intended to kickstart further housebuilding and deal with issues in the planning system (£4bn plan to tackle housing crisis wins a cautious welcome, 24 November). We await further details of how the government intends to deal with more fundamental housing and planning issues to be outlined in a white paper that was disappointingly not published on Wednesday, but is expected soon.
One of the key headlines was an announcement of £2.3bn, forming part of the new £23bn national productivity investment fund, towards infrastructure needs in order to unlock 100,000 new homes in areas of high demand.
Another headline announcement was for £1.4bn, forming part of the same fund, to go towards providing 40,000 additional affordable homes by 2020-21. When one considers that the government’s intention is to build 1m new homes over the course of this parliament, helping to provide 40,000 new affordable homes appears as a drop in the ocean.
It is clear that the government is still relying on the private sector to drag Britain out of its housebuilding malaise, but in the last week government figures have been published showing affordable housing delivery has hit its lowest level since 2001, so it is questionable whether Wednesday’s proposals go far enough.
Paul Grant
Associate solicitor, planning and environmental, Coffin Mew
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Now that letting agents’ fees will be abolished (Report, 24 November), attention could turn to that other concealed charge, the booking fee. York’s Barbican and its agents levy a 12.5% fee on card purchases. They charge no such fee on cash payments, despite the fact that it costs them more to handle cash than debit cards. If rents go up as a result of the abolition of letting agents’ fees, and the price of concert tickets rises if booking fees are outlawed, we shall at least have a more honest market.
Steven Burkeman
York
• The insurance premium tax was invented by the Tories in 1997, and set at 4%. Labour strongly condemned it, but in power increased it to 5%. The Tories have since increased it to 6%, 9.5%, 10%, and now 12%. Someone has to pay for the Tory election bribe not to increase income tax, national insurance, or VAT.
John Richards
Oxford
• Nice to hear from Mr Hammond that we have saved £130 due to the freezing of petrol tax for seven years. He is a little modest. If we consider chimney tax (frozen 327 years, saving £25), soap tax (frozen 181 years, saving £20), brick tax (frozen 166 years, saving £15), window tax (frozen 165 years, saving £75) and playing card tax (frozen 56 years, saving £5) we have actually saved £270. Thank you very much, Mr Hammond.
Ray Chalker
London
• So, now we know that for years to come we will have higher inflation, lower growth and higher borrowing – £58.7bn to be precise. After Brexit things were meant to get better.
Alan Costley
Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire
• As a triple-locked pensioner whose “Jam” children and grandchildren survive on financial support from me, I’m wondering how things will pan out when pensioner poverty creeps back in under the Tories next year and my generation are no longer able to bail out their children?
Chris Pickering
Leeds
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Directors of the Institute for Fiscal Studies normally avoid hyperbole. They do not tend to use words such as “dreadful” when analysing the state of the economy or the public finances.
But that was the term Paul Johnson, the head of the IFS, chose to describe the era of shrinking pay packets triggered by the financial crash of 2007-08.
Back in March, the expectation was that average earnings would finally claw their way back to their pre-crisis level by the start of the next decade. The latest forecasts from the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) suggest the Brexit vote means that will no longer be possible.
Real wages will still be below their 2008 level in 2021, something that Johnson said had not occurred for at least 70 years and possibly a century. A dreadful record, indeed.
He said the UK’s disastrous productivity record was the reason for the sharp drop in earnings in the five years after 2008 and the slow recovery since. Brexit is expected to be double whammy for wages. Productivity growth will be weaker and inflation higher. Real average earnings - pay packets adjusted for inflation - are expected to rise by 5% between now and 2021. That means they will be 3.7% lower in five years’ time than was predicted at the time of the budget in March.
Johnson rallied behind the OBR, which some Conservative MPs and sections of the media have accused of producing over-pessimistic forecasts. The IFS director noted that the OBR’s economic forecasts were noticeably more upbeat than the Bank of England’s.
“Earlier this month, the Bank projected growth of 1.4, 1.5 and 1.6% in 2017, 2018 and 2019 respectively. The OBR’s projections are for growth of 1.4, 1.7 and 2.1%. That’s quite a big difference,” he said.
Slower growth means higher borrowing to cover a bigger budget deficit. By 2020 and 2021, Hammond will be borrowing £32bn more than Osborne was planning, of which £18bn will be due to weaker growth. As the IFS noted, however, there were bigger changes to the borrowing forecasts when the growth disappointed in 2011 and 2012.
“The OBR put £15bn of that £18bn down to the Brexit vote”, Johnson said. “If that turns out to be the effect, that’s a somewhat smaller hit than many forecasters were suggesting.”
Even so, the fresh deterioration in the public finances means that austerity will be extended into the next parliament, assuming that an election takes place in 2020. Hammond has pledged to run a budget surplus between 2020 and 2025, but will need to raise taxes or cut spending by a further £30bn to do so, the IFS said.
Balancing the books will become more difficult over the next decade as a rising number of baby-boomer retirees means a bigger state pension bill. The IFS also wonders how long Hammond can resist the pressure for higher spending on the NHS and on social care.
By and large, though, the new tenant at 11 Downing Street got a relatively easy ride from the thinktank. Chancellors have become accustomed over the years to getting admonished by the IFS on the day after a budget or an autumn statement. A big crowd always turns up to witness it pick the Treasury’s work to pieces.
The IFS found less to complain about than usual. Sure, it tut-tutted about the freeze in fuel duties and was unhappy about the increase in inheritance premium tax, but these were minor quibbles.
It liked the fact that the chancellor had decided to dispense with the autumn statement and praised him for coming up with a package noticeably short on gimmicks. It was impressed by the increases in public investment, with Johnson noting that higher infrastructure spending will take public sector net investment to around 2.3% of GDP. That was what Labour was planning before the financial crisis broke and well above the average over the last 30 years.
“Given the choice between jam today in the form of more money in people’s pockets and jam tomorrow in the form of potential economic returns from greater investment, he went for jam tomorrow.,” he said.
That decision means the outlook for those on low and middle incomes is bleak. Osborne’s announcement in his summer 2015 budget that non-pensioner benefits would be frozen in cash terms for the entire 2015 to 2020 parliament saved the government £3bn a year, but meant 11m households were on average £280 a year worse off.
Hammond has provided a little help through changes to universal credit, but it will be more than offset by the projected impact of inflation. As a result, the 11m households now stand to lose £390 a year, saving the exchequer £4.2bn a year.
Even so, Hammond will still be borrowing 2% of national income by 2019-20. He is able to do so because he has ditched all three of the fiscal rules set by his predecessor. The IFS noted drily that the policy of borrowing to invest looked remarkably similar to that proposed by Ed Balls during the 2015 election campaign. The then shadow chancellor was proposing to balance day-to-day government spending by 2018-19, but Hammond will not even manage that.
Shares in the UK’s biggest chain of estate agents slumped by more than 12% after the company reported a big drop in London property transactions and warned that Brexit was undermining buyers’ confidence.
Countrywide, which operates more than 50 agencies around the UK including Bairstow Eves, John D Wood and Hamptons International, said there had been a 29% plunge in the number of homes it sold in the capital in its most recent three months and warned that profits in the full year would be at the lower end of market expectations.
Its shares were the biggest loser in the FTSE-250 index, closing down 12.5% at 169p. The decline came after another knock, a day earlier, when the shares lost 5.3% as a result of the chancellor’s decision to ban letting agencies charging fees to tenants.
The poor trading update and fees ban have together wiped more than £75m off the value of the company this week and the shares are now worth less than half the 350p they were valued at when the business joined the stock market in 2013.
Countrywide blamed the decline in trading in the capital on fallout from the Brexit vote and changes to stamp duty.
The gloomy update came despite evidence of consumers’ resilience in the months following the referendum. Consumers continue to be the main driver of wider economic growth.
Jim Clarke, Countrywide’s finance director, said there was a big difference between people spending money on smaller, everyday items, and their willingness to commit to buying a new home.
“No one can really show them what the future is,” said Clarke. “There’s a real lack of clarity on what post-Brexit Britain looks like.”
The company pointed to Bank of England figures showing mortgage approvals were 12% lower in the third quarter compared with the same period last year.
Alison Platt, Countrywide’s chief executive, said there was nothing to suggest sales would pick up in the year ahead. “We don’t expect the market conditions for sales to change over the next year. We can’t see any catalyst for it. Taking this business forward is going to be about self-help. The market isn’t going to do us any favours.”
The outlook is weaker across the UK, according to Countrywide, but particularly in London. While the number of homes sold in London declined rapidly in the three months after the Brexit vote, the number of transactions across the rest of the country was down only 1%.
Group revenue in the third quarter fell by 4% to £188.5m. 
Announcing the ban on letting fees on Wednesday the chancellor said the charges on tenants were unfair. “Landlords appoint letting agents and landlords should meet their fees. We will ban fees to tenants as soon as possible.”
News of the policy wiped millions off the value of Countrywide on Wednesday, along with others in the sector.
Platt said on Thursday that she looked forward to working with the government during the consultation process.
“As ever, the devil is always in the detail. Let’s be sure there are no unintended consequences here.”
The Association of Residential Letting Agents has warned that the policy could be counterproductive, because the costs would be passed on to landlords who would in turn raise rents to recoup the costs.
Countrywide said changes to stamp duty in the first quarter resulted in a larger-than-usual supply of rental properties, weighing on rental growth. In some areas, rents fell.
Neil Wilson, a markets analyst at ETX, described Countrywide’s assessment of the property market as “very downbeat”.
He said: “The company says it’s making good progress but today’s trading statement confirms that estate agents are facing a troubled future.
“Wednesday’s autumn statement bombshell banning letting agents from charging upfront fees to tenants couldn’t have come at a worse time for the sector. The trading statement presumably doesn’t take stock of this change so we could see a greater adverse effect as a result.”
An influential group of MPs has urged the government to take immediate action to stop touts using specialist software to buy large numbers of tickets to resell for a profit.
The call from the cross-party culture, media and sport committee follows an evidence session last week when it heard about the activities of touts who offer tickets to events on resale websites.
That prompted the MPs to call for an inquiry into the tax affairs of secondary ticket selling companies, saying they had heard worrying evidence about the close relationship between touts and ticket resale websites.
The chair of committee, the Conservative MP Damian Collins, has written to the culture secretary, Karen Bradley, to call for an immediate end to the use of so-called bots to “harvest” tickets as soon as they are placed on open sale.
The MPs are to table an amendment to the digital economy bill, currently making its way through parliament, which would make it illegal to use software to buy up large numbers of tickets.
The use of bots “appears to be a significant problem”, Collins wrote in the letter, while urging Bradley to more closely examine the ticket reselling industry.
He said the evidence session had “shed a light on much more far-ranging and disturbing factors in the ticketing markets, including clear indications of too close relationships between those selling tickets on the primary market and sellers on the secondary market”.
While secondary ticket sales websites such as StubHub and Viagogo operate legally, organisations representing fans have warned that they are a conduit for touts to resell significant numbers of tickets at a profit, making it harder for individuals to acquire them at cost price.
Collins said the answers given to the committee last week from ticket sellers and resellers “went from complacent to evasive” and gave no confidence that they were seeking to tackle large-scale touting.
He said: “We are writing to the secretary of state to ask her to begin to look more closely at this issue but also as a first step that there seems to be a lot of consensus on amending the digital economy bill to ban the technology that harvests tickets on a large scale before genuine fans ever get a look in.”
The evidence session heard strong evidence indicating there was a significant level of under-reporting of income by known touts trading on secondary sites, Collins said, adding that this should be investigated by tax authorities.
A spokeswoman for the Department of Culture, Media and Sport said the government had commissioned a report into consumer protection over secondary ticketing and planned to respond to this. “We understand fan frustration on ticketing bots and the culture secretary is to hold meetings with stakeholders to discuss their impact on the secondary market and consider this issue further,” she said.
Iranians are experts at driving a hard bargain, famous for haggling with shopkeepers even when sales are not on offer. That traditional skill may not come in handy online, but on Friday the country’s tech-savvy young population will have plenty of opportunity to secure a good deal.
Bamilo, one of the country’s two main online shopping websites, is holding its first version of Black Friday, called Harajome or Friday sale, with lucrative discounts for items including the iPhone 7.
Iranians are already preparing for an online discount bonanza, according to Bamilo’s founder and CEO, Ramtin Monazahian.
“Black Friday used to be a foreign concept here in Iran. In fact, a lot of folks have never even heard of the idea,” he said. “In total more than 600 retailers are participating in Harajome with great discounts to Iranian customers. As of Thursday we have had more than 100,000 pre-subscribers.”
In the absence of Amazon in Iran, Bamilo and its rival, Digikala, have been highly successful. On Friday, Iranian customers will be able to get a 14% discount on the latest iPhone, priced locally at 24.9m rials (£625). A 4K LG television is on offer with a 24% discount at around 17.9m rials (£450). 
The list of electronic items on offer does not give the impression of a country that was under sanctions for many years and still struggling to reconnect with the global market after the implementation in January of a landmark nuclear deal. 
Monazahian said his company has prepared thoroughly for Harajome, mixing offline and online marketing efforts to maximise exposure and spread the word about the event. 
“Bamilo organised bus tours around several key cities, such as Shiraz and Mashhad, where we distributed Parsonline internet packs so shoppers can be online during the campaign period,” he said, in reference to a local service provider.
“We also set up strategic partnerships with leading internet providers, national banks, payment providers and even international brands.” Iranians still have no access to Visa and Mastercard. 
Under the country’s moderate president, Hassan Rouhani, Iran’s tech startup scene has flourished. Internet speeds have improved significantly and 4G mobile phone connections are the norm for a country in which one in four people use the instant messaging app Telegram to communicate.
Filtering, however, is rife and hardliners are trying to undermine advances. They have also threatened those who participate in Iranian startup conferences such as iBridge, scheduled for December in Barcelona.
Monazahian was in London this week to speak about Bamilo, which Alexa ranks as Iran’s 17th most visited website, at the Iran Consumer Summit. A banker educated at the University of Cologne, he returned to his home country a few years ago to co-found the Iran Internet Group, which has apps including Snapp – Iran’s answer to Uber with more than 25,000 drivers in Tehran – and Zoodfood, which is similar to Just Eat.
“Iran’s e-commerce industry is still in its nascent stage, with less than 0.5% of retail commerce online,” Monazahian said. “This is both a challenge and an amazing opportunity. For us, we see it more as the latter. What Alibaba did for China with Singles Day, we want to do for Iran with Harajome.”
Bamilo delivers to more than 1,000 cities in Iran with a cash on delivery option. 
Digikala is considered the biggest site of its kind in the Middle East and third most visited in Iran. It is estimated to be worth $150m (£120m). Last year its co-founder Hamid Mohammadi said it had 760 employees and shipped more than 4,000 orders a day, with same-day delivery services in Tehran.
Monazahian said Iran still had a long way to go. “Many people are still unfamiliar with the marketplace model,” he said. “If you think about it, that’s just step one. We’re also trying to teach our consumers to demand their right to good quality customer service.
“Before we entered the market, there was no such thing as 30-day return policies, free size exchanges and 24/7 customer service support.”
Hermes, the courier group that delivers parcels for John Lewis and Next, has told some drivers it is “mandatory” to work the next two Sundays during the Black Friday rush.
The move contradicts the company’s previous insistence that the work was “completely optional” and increases safety fears about couriers potentially working 20 days without a break.
A field manager for Hermes sent a message to couriers on Wednesday stating: “It is mandatory that you cover your own rounds this Sunday the 27th and next Sunday the 4th of December. If not you must supply your own cover and informed of who by now [sic] ... No excuses.”
The firm responded last week to warnings that long working hours resulting from the rush of online sales around Black Friday could put couriers and road users at risk. It insisted “couriers are not obligated to work on either of those Sundays”.
A Hermes spokeswoman said the note about mandatory Sunday working was a “rogue message”, and that it “did not follow our agreed policies, including the fact that working those Sundays is totally optional”.
The confusion comes as the Health and Safety Executive considers concerns raised by Frank Field MP, the chair of the work and pensions select committee, that fatigued couriers working seven days a week could pose a road safety risk.
The firm responded by insisting “couriers are not obligated to work on either of those Sundays”.
About 5,000 Hermes couriers already work six days a week. One driver told the Guardian he had refused to work on the Sundays around Black Friday because last year he almost fell asleep at the wheel. He said his manager told him that if he did not arrange cover, he might lose work in the new year.
Hermes couriers are classed as self-employed and they argue that insisting they work is not in line with self-employment practices. HM Revenue and Customs is already investigating claims that some Hermes drivers are in false self-employment. The firm denies the claims.
Field said: “If HMRC required any further proof that legions of couriers are being treated as workers, rather than self-employed individuals, they will find it in the latest command Hermes has sent its workforce.
“The idea that the couriers have any real control over whether to accept this work or not is nonsense on stilts. Contrary to what Hermes has previously said, the company is issuing orders to couriers it classes as ‘self-employed’. We know from previous evidence that, if the couriers do not follow those orders, the consequences are dire.”
Hermes said: “A full investigation is under way into the behaviour of this individual [who sent the message], which we find unacceptable. We have also contacted the small percentage of couriers to which the message was sent, to apologise, and have asked them to disregard it.
“To reiterate, our self-employed couriers are free to choose whether they want to provide a service on these Sundays.”
Workers in Britain face the longest squeeze on their pay for 70 years as Brexit knocks wage growth and stokes inflation, a leading thinktank has said.
Picking over Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement, the Institute for Fiscal Studies said that by 2021, real wages in the UK – pay adjusted for inflation – will still not have recovered to their 2008 level before the global financial crisis hit.
Paul Johnson, the thinktank’s director, said: “One cannot stress how extraordinary and dreadful that is, more than a decade without real earnings growth. We have certainly not seen a period remotely like it in the last 70 years and quite possibly the last 100.”
Young people have been worst affected by a squeeze on wages since the crisis, and the effects of the Brexit vote look set to prolong that pain well into a second decade, on the IFS’s reckoning. Pensioners, on the other hand, would be largely protected from an expected sharp pickup in inflation on the back of a weaker pound.
The thinktank also said Hammond had done little to put “more money in people’s pockets” despite government pledges to help “just about managing” families or Jams. In fact, the impact of rising costs and a benefits freeze announced by George Osborne in 2015 would leave working households worse off.
“Given the choice between jam today in the form of more money in people’s pockets and jam tomorrow in the form of potential economic returns from greater investment, he went for jam tomorrow,” it said.
The IFS analysis follow signs that the pound’s sharp fall since the referendum result is hiking the cost of UK imports and could soon be passed on to consumers. Pricing rows over products such as Marmite and Walkers crisps have put shoppers on alert for rising weekly bills.
At the same time, experts say pay growth will stall as companies curb spending while they grapple with political and economic uncertainty.
The government’s independent forecasters, the Office for Budget Responsibility, said on Wednesday that the economy would slow next year and inflation would rise, with knock-on effects for household budgets and the government’s finances.
Those forecasts were picked up in a separate analysis from the Resolution Foundation thinktank showing that families faced a worse squeeze on their living standards over the next five years than they suffered in the wake of the financial crisis.
Its report suggested average earnings were set to grow only half as rapidly as in the austerity years after the economic crisis. At the same time, living standards would be undermined by higher inflation and ongoing welfare cuts.
The foundation’s director, Torsten Bell, said: “The combination of lower growth, higher inflation and the government’s decision to press ahead with big welfare cuts means that households risk experiencing even slower income growth in this parliament than they saw in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
“But unlike the last parliament, it will be low and middle-income households who feel the tightest squeeze this time round.”
The IFS also highlighted a stark contrast in the prospects of young and old as the Brexit process unfolds and exacerbates existing divisions between age groups.
It said most people would face similar changes in costs as inflation picks up, but what varied by age group was the extent to which income could keep pace with those costs.
Some forms of income, such as pensions, are protected from inflation because they rise to offset higher prices. Others, however, are not, including working-age benefits, which were frozen in Osborne’s 2015 post-election budget. At the same time, younger people see their income from work squeezed by inflation if pay rises fail to keep pace with living costs.
Campaigners said the likely blow to younger people exposed the unfairness of the the government’s triple-lock system, which has seen pensions rise every year since 2010 by the rate of inflation, average earnings or a minimum of 2.5%, whichever is higher.
Ashley Seager, the co-founder of the Intergenerational Foundation, said: “The government must stop caving in to the old-age lobby and say enough is enough. It cannot be right that 2 million wealthy oldies who need help the least are universally protected, while the young, who need help the most, are left to pick up the bill. The triple lock must go.”
The government has also faced criticism for presenting a partial reversal of planned cuts to universal credit as a boost to working households when in reality the giveaways will be more than offset by other cuts announced in 2015.
Hammond said in his autumn statement that 3m households would be better off as as result of changes to universal credit, which he described as a “targeted tax cut worth £700m from 2021-22”.
Frank Field, the Labour chair of the commons work and pensions committee, said only a small fraction of the 3m households would benefit in the short term.
“The £700m value of the taper change by 2021-22 only goes a small way towards offsetting the £3bn hit to working families caused by previously announced cuts to universal credit work allowances,” he said.
The IFS presented its outlook for living standards as the Treasury and eurosceptic MPs rowed over the OBR’s forecasts for Britain as it goes through Brexit.
In response to anti-EU MPs’ attacks on the OBR for being overly pessimistic, the IFS noted the watchdog’s growth forecasts were “noticeably more upbeat than the Bank of England’s”.
“Overall, despite some of the headlines, I think we can count the OBR as having been modestly upbeat relative to some other forecasters,” said Johnson. “Even so, the outlook for living standards and for the public finances has deteriorated pretty sharply over the last nine months. Mr Hammond has responded by increasing capital spending and hence increasing borrowing further.”
Hammond also defended the OBR on Thursday, saying the government would be wrong to ignore its forecasts and that “economic forecasting is not a precise science”.
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
Savings protection limit to go back up to £85,000
Black Friday UK: the best deals, tips and discounts
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, gave his first – and last – autumn statement on Wednesday, and there was bad news for motorists but good news for savers. Patrick Collinson gave us his verdict, while we heard what it meant for people around the country. 
Can I watch BBC iPlayer with a black and white TV licence?
Newlyweds discover that flying easyJet is no honeymoon
If you need to send money overseas get expert guidance, competitive exchange rates and free online transfers from the Guardian money transfer service, provided by Moneycorp. 
Make sure your holidays are covered for a whole year with the Guardian’s annual travel cover, provided by Voyager.
Borrowing on credit cards and loans grew at its fastest rate in almost a decade in October, according to figures from Britain’s high street banks, as lenders competed to offer the best deals.
The British Bankers’ Association (BBA) said consumer credit was up by 7% year on year, the fast annual rate of growth since November 2006. In total, net unsecured borrowing increased by £633m during the month, up from £465m in September.
The borrowing spree was fuelled by an increase in personal loans and overdrafts. On a seasonally adjusted basis, net borrowing added up to £413m, higher than the previous six-month average of £286m. Outstanding borrowing on credit cards grew by £220m – just above the six-month average of £211m.
Lenders have been battling to top the best-buy tables for personal loans and credit cards. Interest rates have been cut and deals have been changed. In October, First Direct doubled the maximum it would lend its customers through personal loans to £50,000, and credit card companies have been extending interest-free periods. 
October saw a surprise retail sales boom, according to official figures, and the BBA’s data suggests some of that spending was done on credit.
Rebecca Harding, chief economist at the BBA, said: “Consumer credit is now growing at its fastest rate since November 2006, reflecting strong retail sales growth. Consumer confidence remains robust as borrowers take advantage of record low interest rates.”
Paul Gordon, managing director of credit cards at Lloyds Banking Group, said the figures suggested consumers “are proving relatively resilient in the face of continued uncertainty”.
He added: “As we move towards the end of the calendar year, we can expect that the use of credit cards will continue to rise – particularly in relation to Black Friday and Christmas sales – but the impact of recent political and economic changes on borrowing patterns is yet to be seen.”
The BBA’s seasonally adjusted figures for mortgage lending show that the number of home loans approved for house purchases reached a five-month high in October, at 40,851. The number of remortgages dropped slightly to 24,622 but the number of other loans secured on property rose to 8,847 – its highest since January 2014.
Andrew Wishart, assistant economist at Capital Economics, said approvals for purchases were now not far off the monthly average of 43,000 that the BBA reported in 2015, “with the short-term effect of the referendum on housing market confidence and activity now seemingly behind us”.
He added: “But with recent strong demand from first-time buyers set to be hampered by higher inflation, and credit standards no looser than last year, we don’t expect approvals to surge.”
The chancellor committed almost £4bn to housing in Wednesday’s autumn statement, in a move he said represented a step-change in the government’s ambition to increase the supply of homes for sale and rent.
The money, which the Treasury said was new cash, will be spent through two funds: one providing money for infrastructure projects to make sites viable for building, the other providing money for affordable homes.
Philip Hammond said the government had made good progress, with the number of new homes being built last year hitting an eight-year high, but “for too many, the goal of home ownership remains out of reach”. He added that the challenge of delivering housing was not new “but the effect of unaffordable housing on our nation’s productivity makes it an urgent one”, and said the government planned to more than double capital expenditure on housing.
The first fund is designed to address the problem of potential sites being objected to because of the impact on local infrastructure. The government said sites for up to 100,000 homes could be unlocked by allowing local authorities to bid for funds to spend on roads, utilities and services such as broadband. Money will be targeted at areas of high demand for housing, and councils in London will be able to apply.
The second tranche of money will be available to housing associations and councils and used to fund work on 40,000 additional affordable homes by 2021. The cash can support homes for shared ownership, affordable rents – classed as up to 80% of market rate – and the new rent-to-own policy, but will not be available for homes offered at social rents. New homes for social rent, considered by some to be the only truly affordable housing, are already disappearing, with recent figures showing they accounted for just one in five affordable homes last year.
The Local Government Association (LGA), which represents councils around the country, welcomed the additional funding for housing, but called on the government to include social rented homes in the package.
Lord Porter, chairman of the LGA, said: “Only an increase of all types of housing – including those for affordable or social rent – will increase affordability and make it easier for working families to save for a deposit to buy their first home.”
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) warned that despite the extra money for affordable homes, it expected 13,000 fewer to be built over the next five years. This was a result of the move away from shared ownership schemes – which would have brought in more money for housing associations, and the government’s recent decision to drop plans for rent increases for higher-earning tenants.
Anthony Lee of BNP Paribas Real Estate said the proposed sum was unlikely to achieve the delivery of 40,000 new homes that the government suggested. “Before 2010, when grant funding was previously available to fund affordable housing in private sector-led developments it was typically provided at around £30,000 per bed space, or £130,000 for a three-bed unit,” he said. “However, since that time, house prices in many parts of London have almost doubled, so any grant funding has to work harder to achieve the same outcome that would have been possible in 2010.”
Groups representing aspiring first-time buyers welcomed the ban on letting agents fees which had been trailed ahead of Wednesday’s statement, and the additional funds for new homes.
Betsy Dillner, director of Generation Rent, said: “The government’s previous obsession with home ownership meant that funding wasn’t getting to the people most in need of affordable housing. By giving builders more flexibility over what tenure of homes they build, the government has made it easier to provide homes for people on the lowest incomes.”
However, she said that 40,000 homes over four years “won’t make a big difference”.
Reuben Young, policy officer at PricedOut, said that “more of the right types of homes will be built” under the plans, rather than money being focused on shared ownership. But he said that the continuation of the help-to-buy loan scheme, which Hammond mentioned in his speech, was unwelcome. “We hope government will wean itself off these inflationary demand-side subsidies as soon as possible so we can eventually see homeownership being affordable to average people,” he said.
Jan Crosby, UK head of housing at accountancy firm KPMG, said the autumn statement highlighted that there was “no magic fix for our housing issues”. Crosby said that funding for affordable homes remained at a historically low level, and that the forthcoming housing white paper needed to suggest comprehensive measures to tackle the problems in the market.
“There is a nod towards better integration of transport spending with housing in the detail of the autumn statement,” he said. “The white paper, however, will need to look more widely across infrastructure, devolution of spending powers, planning, taxation, public land funding, delivery models and rental tenures, as well as consider the impact of migration and the generational shift in home ownership, in order to be truly comprehensive and to move the dial on housing volume.”
Ahead of the statement, estate agents had called on the chancellor to make changes to stamp duty at the top end of the market and to look again at the new higher rate of tax on second homes.
Changes introduced two years ago have slowed sales of £1m-plus homes, although recent figures show that the government has recorded an increase in receipts.
Nick Leeming, chairman at estate agency Jackson-Stops & Staff, said: “A cut in current prohibitive stamp duty levels would get the market moving at all levels and give welcome relief to first-time buyers, who are having to grapple with a multitude of costs including saving for a deposit.
“This reform would have resulted in a chain reaction up the housing ladder, spurring current home owners to take their next step and freeing up housing suitable for first-time buyers and second steppers.”
Q I am writing in utter despair and I am hoping you can help. My partner owns a house that he has always rented out. He now needs to sell this property so we can buy our first house together as we are currently renting. He also needs to clear a debt of £50,000 from a messy divorce.
My partner bought his rental property in 1998 for £100,000; it has recently been valued at £370,000. He remortgaged the house to pay for a property with his ex-wife, which she was given as part of the divorce settlement. As a result, when he sells the rental property there will be a mortgage of £125,000 left for him to pay off.
Here comes my nightmare: I have tried to work out how much capital gains tax (CGT) he will have to pay and it’s roughly £65,000 if we include the £125,000 mortgage (that his ex has gained from not us). Can this be right? How is this possible? Is there anything we can do? If we pay £65,000 in tax on top of the £50,000 court debt we will be left with very little to purchase a house for us and children. EM
A I’m not sure that most people would regard having £130,000 (that’s the £370,000 valuation minus £125,000 minus £50,000 minus £65,000) to put towards the purchase of a house as “very little” although I can see that it might not be enough to buy a house outright without a mortgage. That £130,000 figure also assumes that your CGT calculation is correct, which I’m slightly doubtful about, not least because you mention including the mortgage in the CGT sums – you don’t need to do this.
You do, however, need to factor in buying and selling costs such as legal fees, stamp duty, estate agents’ fees and the cost of capital improvements to the property if there were any. This works in your favour because it reduces the taxable capital gain.
Stamp duty on a property costing £100,000 was definitely 1% of the whole sum in 1998, so £1,000. But guessing at the other costs – for example, £2,000 for two lots of legal fees and estate agents’ fees of, say, £6,000 and no improvement costs – the gain would be £261,000. Knocking off your partner’s annual CGT exempt amount of £11,100 from this (in the 2016-17 tax year) would bring the gain down to £249,900. Admittedly, this isn’t small but would result in a tax bill of £44,982 for a basic-rate taxpayer and £69,972 for a higher-rate taxpayer.
An alternative to selling the rental property and avoid triggering a CGT bill would be to remortgage it to raise the funds to pay the £50,000 court debt and provide you with a cash deposit to put towards a home for you, your partner and your children. Assuming your partner could increase the mortgage to 75% of the value of the property, this would give you both just over £100,000 for your new home. But you would also probably need a residential mortgage to buy it. Whether the figures work for your lenders is down to them. Your partner’s accountant (if he has one) might also like to take a look at them.
My husband and I are a young newlywed couple from Australia. Our honeymoon was a tour of Europe. It was the adventure of a lifetime, marred by one nightmare – our first experience of flying easyJet.
We arrived early for our flight from London to Annecy, but at the boarding gate three of us were told easyJet had overbooked the plane and two would have to stay behind.
We were offered the one remaining seat but, as it was our honeymoon and I was nervous about travelling to France for the first time alone, we agreed to let another single passenger take it instead. We were assured we would each receive compensation of €250 for being denied boarding.
We spent six distressing hours at the airport trying to sort out the situation, then three hours transferring to another airport for the next available flight, thus missing a pre-paid night in our French hotel. Four months on, we have still not received compensation. A recent email from easyJet said only one of us would receive the payout and claimed that we had refused to take the spare seat, even though another passenger had taken it instead. Now it says we are not due anything at all. RH, Queensland, Australia
The email trail from easyJet’s customer services makes for dismal reading. The first, sent in September, confirmed you were victims of its notoriously zealous overbooking policy and therefore due €250 each under EC Regulation 261. The second reckoned that, since you refused the last seat on the plane, you are only entitled to half that.
The third, the following month, reminded you that if disruption is caused by “extraordinary circumstances” beyond the airline’s control, it is not liable to pay compensation.
The press office swiftly establishes the obvious: that easyJet’s overbooking policy, while it may seem “extraordinary” to passengers who’ve paid for a seat that they can’t have, is entirely within the airline’s control and that you should have been paid the full whack months ago.
It therefore authorises a payment of €500, plus £250 to cover your expenses and distress. All of which sounds promising … except the next day you are emailed again and told, in a woefully ungrammatical message, that the total you will receive is €250.
The cynical view is that easyJet is wriggling and weaving to save itself a few quid. The real explanation, apparently, is that staff at the departure gate logged you as declining an offered seat, and forgot to add that another stranded passenger could travel in your stead. No one has amended the record since.
I am promised that you will soon be sent the full sum.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
Chancellor’s move is branded a ‘hammer blow for the hard-pressed’, with young drivers and those in London expected to be hardest hit
The fourth industrial revolution isn’t just near – it’s here.
The world of work is already in a massive transition to a more global, technology-driven, flexible economy in which whole career progressions are being altered, new professions are coming into existence and traditional jobs are being swallowed by automation. The conditions are less predictable and the steps needed to succeed less obvious.
For young people in particular these changes will have – and to some extent already are having – a huge impact.
Since 2015, the Foundation for Young Australians (FYA) has released a series of reports called The New Work Order, exploring the economic forces (automation, globalisation, collaboration) shaping the future of work, changing education to employment pathways and the transferrable skills and capabilities required to survive in the changing world of employment.
The crux of the issue: nearly 60% of Australia students –71% of those in vocational education and training (VET) – are currently studying or training for occupations where the vast majority of jobs will be radically altered by automation. Many of the jobs they’re studying for could vanish in 10 to 15 years’ time.
Just as these disappear however, new and different ones will be created simultaneously. Consider the advent of the iPhone in 2007, for example, that created an entirely new industry of app development virtually overnight.
Despite all these coming changes, our mindset about work and the resulting advice we provide to young people remains largely the same.
We rely on stereotypes of jobs we know have always been there, and suggest training or educational pathways that will secure a job in these occupations. Yet in this new work order where young people are predicted to have 17 jobs over 5 careers, it’s clear that this traditional, linear career advice is no longer relevant or helpful.
To help young Australians navigate this more complex and uncertain world of work, understand where future jobs will exist and ensure they are equipped with the right skill set, FYA has turned to big data.
In our latest report, The New Work Mindset, we have analysed more than 2.7m job advertisements using a clustering algorithm that looked at the skills requested for each job and how similar they are to skills requested for other jobs. Over 600 occupations were grouped based on demand for similar skill sets, with over 4,600 diverse skills requested.
Our analysis shows that there are seven new job clusters in the Australian economy where the required technical and enterprise skills are closely related and more portable than previously thought. These jobs clusters include the Generators, the Artisans, the Carers, the Informers, the Technologists, the Designers and the Coordinators.
What we have found through this analysis is that when a young person trains or works at one job, they acquire skills and capabilities that will help them get 13 other jobs. In other words, skills are more portable than we once thought.
For example, the data reveals that the technical and enterprise skills commonly required for an environmental research scientist, part of the Informers jobs cluster, are portable into at least 13 other jobs such as fire officer, life science technician, and medical administrator where skills overlap. The common skills and capabilities between these jobs include data analysis, resource management, contract management and natural resource management.
Not all jobs switches are an overnight exercise – some will require additional formal or on-the-job training, such as the transition from a nurse to an anaesthetist. The job clusters provide the opportunity to identify skill gaps however, and find ways to fill them by taking short courses, further study, or seeking on-the-job training.
Our report also identified which of the job clusters offer greater long term security than others on average.
What these findings reinforce is that the way careers education is currently provided to young people is flawed.
So what kind of information do young people need to succeed in this new work order?
We need to shift the way we approach our working lives – to think in terms of skills instead of jobs.
To ensure this can happen we believe our existing systems including careers education, curriculums, courses and career information need to focus on building a portfolio of applicable skills and capabilities over their lifetime.
Instead of focusing on a so-called “dream job” it may be more useful for young people to think about the “dream cluster” based on their skills and interests and where they are likely to have the most longevity. Developing a portfolio of applicable skills and capabilities based on the requirements of the job cluster will help ensure young people are able to easily move between roles.
This could include our government, educators, parents and young people coming together to look at what else we can do to provide tools and support, as well as information which will help them to deliver careers advice more effectively.
Throughout our New Work Order report series, FYA has consistently called for investment in a national enterprise skills and careers education strategy to help shape education in Australia.
By investing in the next generation to equip and inspire them for a radically different future of work, we will ensure they are able to not only survive, but thrive in this new work order – and ultimately ensure Australia’s future prosperity.
Philip Hammond conceded that Brexit will blow a £59bn black hole in the public finances over the next five years, as he outlined plans to boost investment in infrastructure and housing to equip the UK economy for life outside the EU.
In his first fiscal statement, the chancellor, who had supported remain, sought to strike a cautiously upbeat tone about the country’s prospects, saying the economy had “confounded commentators at home and abroad with its strength and its resilience” since the referendum result last June.
But the first official projections conducted after the vote of the likely impact of leaving the EU pointed to significantly weaker growth after Brexit.
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) announced that there would be a cumulative £122bn of extra borrowing over the next five years, with £59bn of that as a direct result of Brexit. Other factors included weaker-than-expected tax revenues, and policy changes, including Hammond’s decision to spend more on infrastructure.
George Osborne was expecting to achieve a surplus of £11bn on the public finances by 2020-21; instead, the OBR is now forecasting a £21bn deficit – and public debt is expected to peak at more than 90% of GDP.
With little cash to spare, Hammond offered only modest handouts to the “just about managing” families (Jams) Theresa May’s government had said it wanted to help, although he repeatedly used the mantra of “building an economy that works for everyone”.
The chancellor announced a renewed freeze in fuel duty, to help motorists – largely paid for with an increase in insurance premium tax from 10% to 12% – and a partial reversal of planned cuts to universal credit.
But Labour said there was no cash for either the NHS or social care, which are under increasing strain with winter approaching. Instead, the main thrust of Hammond’s first set-piece outing at the dispatch box was how to help Britain withstand the challenges of leaving the EU.
Instead of a headline-grabbing gimmick, Hammond ended his speech with the surprise announcement that he had delivered the final autumn statement. In future, budgets will be held annually in the autumn, with a more slimmed-down update in the spring, meaning that there would be two budgets in 2017.
Hammond told the Commons that the Brexit vote “makes more urgent than ever the need to tackle our economy’s long-term weaknesses, like the productivity gap, the housing challenge, and the damaging imbalance in economic growth and prosperity across our country”.
The chancellor added: “In the real world, it takes a German worker four days to produce what we make in five; which means, in turn, that too many British workers work longer hours for lower pay than their counterparts.”
Hammond said he would set aside £23bn over the next five years, to be spent on areas such as new housing projects and hi-tech research, funded by extra borrowing. A Treasury spokesman, lifting a phrase more commonly used by Labour, said “he is borrowing to invest”.
Labour pointed out that other policies, including a ban on letting agents’ fees, were taken from its 2015 manifesto, as Theresa May’s government deliberately takes a more interventionist approach to what it regards as failing markets.
Hammond also promised to take another look at the household energy market, where consumer groups have repeatedly warned customers are being ripped off.
In a sign that the government expects the public finances to continue to be fragile, the chancellor also hinted that costly pledges, including the “triple-lock” on pensions, would have to be reviewed before the Conservatives draw up their manifesto for the next general election.
“As we look ahead to the next parliament, we will need to ensure we tackle the challenges of rising longevity and fiscal sustainability,” Hammond said. “And so the government will review public spending priorities and other commitments for the next parliament in light of the evolving fiscal position at the next spending review.”
Peter Dixon, UK economist at Commerzbank, said: “The government remains hamstrung by its desire to further reduce the fiscal deficit at the same time as Brexit-related uncertainty is likely to rise. For this reason, it will prove difficult to help the Jams who suffered under George Osborne’s tenure as chancellor.”
The OBR warned that Brexit would lead to weaker growth and lower tax receipts, because of higher inflation, slower immigration, and a decade-long slowdown in trade growth. It has assumed “that the negotiation of new trading arrangements with the EU and others slows the pace of import and export growth for the next 10 years”.
In total, the OBR said it expected the chancellor to have to borrow an extra £122bn over the next five years – with almost half of that, £59bn, attributable to the impact of Brexit. Austerity is now expected to continue into the next parliament: more than a decade after Osborne promised to tackle the deficit run up during the financial crisis.
The OBR said it had been forced to base its forecasts on “broad-brush judgments” about the likely path of Brexit, because of the lack of clarity from the government. It asked for “a formal statement of government policy as regards its desired trade regime and system of migration control,” but the government directed it to public statements from Theresa May, who has repeatedly refused to give a “running commentary” on Brexit.
OBR projections also showed economic growth sliding to 1.4% in 2017, from the 2.2% the OBR was expecting in March, before recovering to 2.1% by 2020. But the OBR warned that there was more uncertainty than usual surrounding its forecasts – and some commentators suggested there could be worse to come.
With the public finances expected to deteriorate, Hammond could have made emergency spending cuts; but instead he formally abandoned George Osborne’s target of dragging the public finances back into the black by the end of this parliament in 2019-20, and introduced new, looser tax and spending rules.
Under the new framework, the budget deficit is now not expected to be eliminated until some time in the next parliament. In the autumn statement “green book”, the Treasury said its approach “strikes the right balance between restoring the public finances to health in the medium term whilst providing sufficient flexibility to support the economy in the near term”.
Treasury sources said this approach would leave him room for manoeuvre to take emergency measures, if the economy weakens more sharply than expected, as article 50 is triggered next year.
In the House of Commons, Hammond’s predecessor Osborne, who rose from the back benches to congratulate him on his “assured delivery”, said: “The independent OBR has given us a very sober assessment of the economic and borrowing challenges that Britain faces and the chancellor is right to keep his powder dry.”
While Hammond unravelled some of Osborne’s policies, including his strict tax and spending rules, he reaffirmed several of his predecessor’s key pledges, including raising the tax-free personal allowance to £12,500 a year by the end of this parliament, and cutting corporation tax to 17%. Most of the welfare cuts Osborne planned, including a cash freeze in working-age benefits, and a £30-a-week cut in employment support allowance for disabled people, will go ahead.
Labour MPs repeatedly challenged Hammond about the price of Brexit. Former Labour leader Ed Miliband said the new forecasts were “a salutary warning to us about the decisions we take in the coming months”, adding “isn’t it a very strong argument for us to remain as close as possible to our largest trading area, the single market, and inside not outside the customs union?”
Shadow chancellor John McDonnell said: “Today’s statement places on record the abject failure of the last six wasted years and offers no hope for the future. The figures speak for themselves: growth, down; business investment, down; and their own deficit target, failed; their debt target, failed.”
Andrew Harrop, general secretary of the Fabian Society, said: “This wasn’t a Brexit budget, it was a Brexit uncertainty budget. Almost all the dire economic and fiscal news that was revealed today was the result, not of Brexit itself, but of the referendum decision and the pending article 50 negotiation. This could be just the start.”
With two universities and two strongly performing grammar schools, an arthouse cinema and a theatre, the Georgian city of Lancaster is one of the more affluent areas of the north-west of England.
It is a thriving and popular place to live, and students make up about 15% of the 141,000 residents of the district, which includes the poorer seaside towns of Heysham and Morecambe, and the town of Carnforth, near the Cumbrian border.
It is these smaller, more deprived areas that probably account for the relatively low average pre-tax personal income of £22,300, £5,100 below the national average, as well as the district voting for Brexit. Lancaster voted 51.1% in favour of leaving the EU, surprising many on the Labour-run city council, which includes eight Green party councillors. Unemployment is about the same as the UK average, with 1.8% of the population claiming out-of-work benefits, compared with 1.9% nationally.
The town centres of many leave-voting areas of the north of England can be a depressing sight, dominated by pawn shops, charity shops, takeaways and bookies. But with a healthy mix of independent shops and most of the major chain stores, Lancaster’s city centre has weathered the recession and the rise of internet retail better than most. Penny Street is one of the main pedestrianised shopping zones, with three bank branches, several pubs and cafes, an M&S and a McDonald’s.
The Guardian asked local shoppers and traders what they wanted from Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement, and what they thought of the measures he announced.
I’ve had a menswear shop in various locations across Lancaster for 10 years and I’ll tell you what’s a killer: business rates. Philip Hammond didn’t really say anything about that. I now pay £12,300 a year for this shop, and that’s before I pay the rent, the electric, wages.
It’s all right for the big boys, your Costa Coffees and the like – they have hundreds of branches and can benefit from economies of scale. But for an independent business trying to operate on the high street, it is really difficult. We are competing with online businesses who don’t have to pay business rates. I think a lot more people would give starting a business a go if they were lower. I’d like to see VAT cut, too. He’s giving £1bn for broadband, but my broadband is fine.
I wish people would realise that business owners like me aren’t loaded. If they keep buying online rather than shopping locally, we won’t be here in six months, the high street will die and they’ll have to go to Preston or Manchester to do their shopping.
I voted to stay in the EU. I think we need to be able to trade with the EU. I haven’t seen a knock-on effect from Brexit yet, but it will come. A lot of our brands, such as Nike, are US companies, and I am expecting it to cost more to buy from them next year.
I’m officially retired, but I can’t afford to run my house on my pensions, I get the basic state pension and a small private one, so I still work. People say, ‘you’re 75, you shouldn’t have to work’, but I’m fit and I can, so I do a bit of dealing in musical instruments and building for local pensioners.
I don’t mind that there wasn’t really anything in the autumn statement for pensioners. We get plenty. Of course, if someone offered me an extra £50 a month, I wouldn’t turn it down, but we get enough. People in this country want too much. My wife has worked as a missionary in Africa and there were ministers there with no shoes on their feet. People here don’t realise how wealthy they are.
I’d say I’m a radical person. I think Trump is the best thing that ever happened and I think we should get out of Europe as quickly as possible. Thank God that Theresa May appears to be a Christian and another Margaret Thatcher. But I do think it is important to get rid of the deficit. We need to get out of the red and into the black, and I am prepared to do my share of watching the pennies to get there.
The autumn statement wasn’t as bad as I was expecting. The bit about building new homes sounds good. In Lancaster they have been building houses, but they are mostly luxury apartments on the quayside. They’re mostly high end and out of my budget.
I rent, but off my dad. One of the things that put me off renting privately was the fees the letting agents charge, plus the fact they wanted three months’ rent upfront. So I think getting rid of letting agency fees is a good thing.
The more money people have in their pockets, the better for businesses such as ours. We need people to have disposable income if they are going to treat themselves to art and luxury items.
I don’t really mind that they have given up on running a surplus by 2020. It’s just fictional money to me. It doesn’t make a difference for real people, unless it leads to another recession.
Most of our clients are in the older age range and what they complain about most is interest rates. They remember the good old 90s, when mortgage rates were at 15% and so was interest on savings. Like all the other banks and building societies, we have cut our interest rates. The best rate we offer is 1.25% on the five-year Isa. They are not happy about that at all, but then again, I don’t really see what the government can do about interest rates.
What we are seeing is customers coming in and using their savings to make lump sum reductions on their mortgages or increasing their monthly payments. The older generation are doing an awful lot of gifting money away, giving to their children and grandchildren, who they fear will never get on the housing ladder without it.
I’ve been in banking for 36 years and worked through three recessions, the last one being the worst – 2008 was tough for everybody – but there’s a lot of confidence locally. Business is vibrant. Agriculture has had a difficult time, particularly dairy farmers, but things are getting better.
It was good to see more commitments around the “northern powerhouse”. It’s a project that businesses here are really keen to get involved with. They think it’s positive for the region.
I look after small and medium businesses: companies that make widgets, who bash metal, agriculture. They will welcome the cut in corporation tax to 17%. They can use the savings to invest.
Our customers are investing in their businesses and we are helping them do that. There was a mixed reaction locally to Brexit. Exporters are seeing the biggest benefit because of the exchange rate, though there aren’t a lot of exporters in Lancaster. I think business people took a breath in the immediate aftermath of the vote, but they realise they need to invest to grow. We are helping our customers buy premises, buy machinery. We haven’t seen any drop in loans since the referendum.
Banning agency fees will be a bit of a body-punch for landlords who are already reeling from stamp duty hikes and diminishing tax relief over the next four years. Now they’re going to have to fund, to a degree, the application and referencing process. But it’s definitely a good thing for tenants.
I’ve seen some of the charges that have been exposed in the press. Apparently the average is £340 nationally, which is three times the average that we charge. We charge about £100 plus VAT. The industry does not have the best of reputations and when you see what some people have been charging, it does show that letting agents haven’t really been looking at tenants as customers. They’ve been looking at them as an opportunity to make money.
More housebuilding is always welcome. The supply of housing is lower than I’ve ever seen it and people are always going to want to own their own homes. Brexit might have made a slight difference to supply in the housing market and made people more reluctant to sell, but we’ve seen growth pretty much on everything. Rents, prices and mortgages. It’s all very buoyant.
I’m disappointed there aren’t more measures for people like me. I’ve just had a baby boy and we’ve struggled to manage dealing with the loss of my partner’s income while she went on maternity leave. I’ve had to take a second job as a head chef at a new restaurant in Kendal.
I would have liked to see something done with VAT on sales. Basically it just takes away the incentive to do that bit better because as soon as you earn over the £89,000 mark you have to pay 20% on every penny that comes in. I think it should be in stages. It was a big struggle for me earlier in the year. I started opening nights and an extra day a week just to cover the VAT bill.
I’ve got no idea what effect Brexit will have on my business. In my opinion, politicians talk so much crap anyway that if you pick one over the other, is it really going to make much difference?
I came to Lancaster from Bulgaria two and half years ago and set up my business in May with help from friends. Business is going OK at the moment, but it’s early days. I would have liked to see taxes on businesses cut, but everyone would want that. Brexit has had no impact me and my business so far. I think it will make more of a difference to bigger companies.
I came here because I thought it would be easier to set up a business here than in Bulgaria, but now I’ve realised that it’s the same as everywhere else. I don’t expect to get more help from the government. I wanted a business in order to be self-sufficient.
I set up the business when I was 16 – I run a stall in Lancaster two days a week and supply free range eggs to local cafes and shops. Business is up at the moment. We’ve got a lot of regular customers and without them we don’t have a business.
I’m pleased about the announcement that they will be cracking down on tax avoidance schemes. We pay our taxes – why do others get away with it? Sometimes I feel that once I’ve paid my expenses, paid for the van, paid my taxes, there’s not much left.
It’s good that they’re going to build more houses. I’m saving to buy a house at the moment, but getting my deposit money together is hard and I still need a lot more. I’ve got a help to buy Isa, but that’s only going to help a bit. Me and my girlfriend would like to move to Lancaster from Bentham, in the Yorkshire Dales, and the areas we’re looking at are expensive: you’re talking £120,000 minimum.
I’d hoped for a reduction of VAT. It’s really killing a lot of businesses. If they could reduce that down to 17.5%, or even to increase the threshold, that would be helpful. The living wage doesn’t affect me because I always pay anybody who works for me £9 an hour. I just think you should treat people fairly and I think £9 is a more realistic living wage.
I’d have liked to see a reduction in beer prices. Here our beer prices are very low because we’ve got a good relationship with the suppliers, but other places can’t compete. If the beer prices were brought down I think you’d get a lot more custom in public houses, which would generate more jobs.
We’ve struggled with the increasing national living wage. I know people have to live, but at the same time small businesses, because we’ve only got a certain amount of money we can use for wages, will employ fewer staff and put the beer up to compensate.
Do not run away with the idea that the chancellor has borrowed the clothes of Donald Trump and ordered an infrastructure splurge. Ploughing £23bn into a new national productivity investment fund sounds impressive until you remember that the HS2 high-speed railway, funded separately, is due to cost £56bn at the last count.
Remember, too, that the £23bn will be spent over five years, so an average of £4.6bn a year. And note that the spending is weighted towards the later years; in the first year, 2017-18, the figure is just £2.4bn.
Of that sum, affordable housing will claim almost half and the outlay should properly be seen as a necessary response to government figures that showed the number of affordable homes built in England last year fell to the lowest level for 24 years.
Hammond, in his speech, said he had deliberately avoided turning his statement into a long list of individual projects being supported. But was that to avoid boring his audience or because government is still uncertain about what it wants to build?
Some of the known elements – the £1bn to explore 5G broadband and the upgrade to rail and road links between Oxford and Cambridge – already feel over-familiar. Does the government even know how it plans to spend all its £23bn? Decisions on almost a third – the £7bn earmarked for 2021/22 – will only be made “in due course,” according to the Treasury document.
“The missing component in the autumn statement was a new pipeline of transparent, viable projects for much heralded high-value investment,” said John Hicks, director of AECOM, an infrastructure services firm that has worked on 2012 Olympics and Crossrail. Andrew Jameson of MUFG, which invests in infrastructure around the world, made a similar point: “It is disappointing that the statement did not indicate any real signs of a properly-defined pipeline of core infrastructure projects, likes schools and hospitals, which has been lacking in recent years and is much needed in the UK.”
In Hammond’s defence, one could argue that the government has a plan to get there eventually. He said between 1% and 1.2% of GDP will be invested every year from 2020 in economic infrastructure, which is defined as transport, energy, flood defences, water, waste and digital communications, areas covered by the new-ish national infrastructure commission.
A ratio of 1%-1.2% compares to 0.8% of GDP being spent currently, so Hammond’s commitment is meaningful. But four years is a long time to wait for a bigger set of projects that businesses like to term “shovel ready”. And the shame is that so much could have been done, and earlier, if successive governments had not been bewitched by big-budget HS2. Those dull but easy-to-do road and rail upgrades will do more to meet Hammond’s productivity ambitions than the new high-speed railway.
Estate agents’ share prices tell the story: they will be hurt by the ban on letting agents’ fees charged to tenants. London-based estate agent Foxtons fell 14%; Countrywide, the UK’s largest agency, was 5% lower.
Their trade bodies queued up to warn that the fees will just rebound on tenants via higher rents. Maybe they will, in part, but the process should not be mechanical. Estate agents will first have to persuade landlords to pick up fees previously charged to tenants. Some landlords, one suspects, will make the reasonable point that the agents have only themselves to blame for milking the market. Many of those landlords have their own complaints about agents’ price-gouging tactics.
The chancellor’s ban is welcome. It does not guarantee to improve the lot of tenants. But it will make fees more transparent, which is definitely an improvement.
• This article was amended on 25 November 2016. An earlier version misnamed Andrew Jameson as Andrew Johnson.
Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement has delivered winners and losers. But who are they?
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) called Hammond’s spending on infrastructure “modest”. But an extra £2.3bn infrastructure fund for a promised 100,000 new homes is good news if you know how to build a wall or lay sewage piping, or employ lots of people who do.
See also the promises of funding for 40,000 extra “affordable” homes, a new road linking Oxford and Cambridge and more broadband fibre installation in homes and businesses.
A niche demographic, perhaps, but every vote counts. The most conspicuous rabbit Hammond pulled from his hat was £7.6m to “save” Wentworth Woodhouse, described by the chancellor as “one of the UK’s most important historic houses”.
The house, Hammond said, was the inspiration for Pride and Prejudice’s Pemberley, although it is not the only stately home to make such a claim. People “just about managing” on low incomes are certain to be delighted.
Hammond is setting aside £412m to help Whitehall wonks “strengthen trade policy capacity” and “support the renegotiation of the UK’s relationship” with the EU in the run-up to Brexit.
This is surely unrelated to a memo leaked last week that suggested the civil service was struggling to cope with the enormous task of leaving the EU, or to the suggestion by a number of former senior mandarins that the service is unprepared for the task.
To cheers, Hammond announced he would “stand on the side of the millions of hardworking people” by cancelling the rise in fuel duty. The fact that this is the seventh year in a row in which the government has done so may lessen the surprise somewhat, but the chancellor boasted this would save the average driver £130 a year.
Motorists may also be cheered by the £220m to help solve traffic “pinch points” on strategic roads and a commitment to resurface 80% of the strategic road network.
It couldn’t happen to a more popular bunch. Shares in some of Britain’s biggest estate agencies plummeted in response to the chancellor’s move to ban “as soon as possible” the large fees charged by agents when letting properties to new tenants.
The move was welcomed by campaign groups including Shelter, but others warned that agents and landlords could pass on the expenses in the form of higher rents – an argument advanced, notably, by the housing minister Gavin Barwell in September.
If your gym membership is through your job, that is. To “promote fairness”, the government is ending the tax and national insurance breaks available for a range of workplace benefits, including gym memberships, phone contracts, computers and private medical insurance contributions.
Pension arrangements, childcare vouchers and the cycle-to-work scheme are protected, but perks for company cars (except low-emissions vehicles), school fees and accommodation will be excluded from 2021. Get on that treadmill while you can.
What seemed like a promise was really more of a threat. Pensioners have benefited since 2010 from the so-called “triple-lock”, a guarantee that the state pension will go up every year by either inflation, the average rise in earnings or 2.5%, whichever is the highest. This is great if you’re older, but not if you’re a 20-something on a low wage who feels the baby boomers are still hogging all the good stuff.
Hammond vowed the government would “meet our pledge” to protect pensions until 2020; after that, however, it will need to look at “the challenges of rising longevity and fiscal sustainability”. Which sounds awfully like a warning.
Everyone’s favourite soft-tissue neck injury has been quite the thing over the past decade, during which time claims to car insurers have soared by 50%, costing them about £1bn a year and motorists around £40 each in increased premiums.
This, the government says, is “unacceptably high”. What’s more, it doesn’t – shock! – believe all the claims are genuine. It’s looking at scrapping or capping the right to compensation. Insurers have promised to pass on the savings, according to the government. No, honestly, they really will.
Savers desperate for a better return on their cash will be able to take out a new “market-leading” government-backed savings bond paying around 2.2%, the chancellor, Philip Hammond, has announced.
The government expects about 2 million people to snap up the bond, which will be offered by National Savings & Investments from spring 2017 and will be for savers willing and able to tie up their money for three years.
The expected 2.2% interest rate is better than the top rate currently available on a three-year savings bond, which is 1.63% from Ikano Bank, and the new product will be available to anyone aged 16 or over. But some commentators were disappointed that the maximum investment will be £3,000. Someone investing the full amount could earn a total of just over £200 in interest after three years.
Martin Lewis, founder of the website MoneySavingExpert.com, said: “This new NS&I bond isn’t the chancellor’s rabbit out of a hat – it’s more of a mouse. Unlike its predecessor, the pensioner bond, which allowed people to save up to £10,000 at up to 4% for three years, this is £3,000 at a likely 2.2% ... Certainly any account that beats the paltry rates of interest that we have currently is to be welcomed, but I don’t see many people whooping.”
Philip Hammond has pledged to retrieve £2bn lost to the exchequer via tax avoidance, continuing the recent tradition of chancellors using set-piece speeches to target aggressive planning schemes.
A combination of new and previously announced initiatives will account for the haul, as Hammond also promised to press ahead with new sanctions on advisers who facilitate tax avoidance.
In his autumn statement to the Commons, Hammond said: “The government is committed to tackling tax evasion, avoidance and aggressive tax planning … but we must constantly be alert to new threats to our tax base, and be willing to move swiftly to counter them.”
He said he would close salary sacrifice schemes where employees are allowed to pay for perks such as gym memberships out of gross earnings, “shut down inappropriate use of the VAT flat rate scheme” and “introduce a new penalty for those who enable the use of a tax avoidance scheme that HMRC later challenges and defeats”.
The government also said it would “clarify the application of the VAT zero-rating for adapted motor vehicles to stop the abuse of this legislation, while continuing to provide help for for disabled wheelchair users”.
“These measures, and others set out in the autumn statement document, raise around £2bn over the forecast period,” Hammond said.
The measures received a mixed reception from the tax profession, especially those targeted at advisers on avoidance schemes.
Frank Haskew, the head of the tax faculty at the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), said: “The public is rightly concerned about tax avoidance, and we support efforts to tackle it.
“ICAEW already has a professional code of conduct in relation to tax advice and we have been working with the government to ensure that our code continues to be fit for purpose and retains confidence.
“Although we do not have the details yet, the government needs to ensure any new rules are properly targeted only to tackle those advisers that promote aggressive tax schemes.
“If the measures are too widely targeted, there is a danger that reputable professional advisers could still end up being caught in the crossfire when advising on legitimate tax planning, while the real targets escape any penalty.”
The chancellor also attacked so-called “disguised earnings” – often known as perks – which are payments made to an employee so as to bypass the payment of PAYE and national insurance.
Hammond said: “At the budget we committed to removing the tax benefits of disguised earnings for employees, and I am now going to do the same for the self-employed and employers, raising a further £630m over the forecast period.”
He also attacked salary sacrifice schemes, where costs such as the cost of gym memberships are taken out of gross earnings, thereby providing the employee with a tax saving.
Sue Robinson, an employment tax partner at the accountancy firm EY, said: “People who use such schemes for benefits such as health screening and mobile phones and tablets will be among those who see their tax bills rise.
“Many of those benefits in kind are often portrayed as ‘perks’ for the higher paid, but the expansion of the salary sacrifice model over recent years will mean that large numbers of basic rate taxpayers will be impacted, particularly in sectors such as the health service.”
The gains and losses for the “just about managing” households in the 2016 autumn statement.
We spoke to a range of people about what they thought of the announcements in the autumn statement.
Ben Geraghty, 24, is a rider for food delivery company Deliveroo in London and also helps train new staff as a safety assessor. He earns about £8.70 an hour and has worked for the firm for more than a year; he used to work between 35 and 40 hours a week but has reduced his hours in recent months.
He has recently become more involved in helping other Deliveroo drivers to unionise after they went on strike in search of better pay and conditions. Currently classed as self-employed, Geraghty and some of his fellow drivers are battling to be recognised as workers.
Geraghty says he and his fellow Deliveroo workers were on high alert for any hint from the chancellor on how the government intends to treat workers in the gig economy. Former Tony Blair aide Matthew Taylor has been asked by the government to look into the status of gig economy workers, amid legal battles over whether they are considered self-employed.
But any hopes of an update on the government’s thinking were dashed. “An idea of what the political class thinks regarding that would have been interesting to us,” said Geraghty. “It might be popular for them to criticise Deliveroo and Uber, but it’s difficult for them because if they go ahead with Brexit, companies like that will be the sort they’ll want to attract.”
His disappointment was tempered by the announcement of an increase in the tax-free personal allowance to £11,500. “For Deliveroo drivers it is good if there is a larger amount of money untaxed,” he said. “We’re low paid and most people are on or around that borderline of the tax-free threshold.”
Geraghty said the time that riders who use motorbikes or mopeds spend on the road means petrol is a large proportion of their annual outgoings, so the seventh successive fuel duty freeze was also greeted warmly. “Anything for people who have to spend money on petrol is positive,” Geraghty said.
The nature of Deliveroo drivers’ job means they are also regular road users, so Geraghty is pleased that there will be more money for road improvements. “The roads in London are not good, especially if you’re a cyclist so we definitely support that 100%,” he said. “Improvements to the roads might just make maintenance of bikes a bit easier if there are fewer potholes.”
However, he is sceptical about whether it do much to improve the long-term prospects for him and fellow drivers. “In reality, Deliveroo drivers and people working in the gig economy are not going to be looking at the autumn statement,” he said. “They’re being squeezed anyway and they’ll continue to be squeezed.”
Aerospace engineer Muhammad Rafiq, 46, was glad to hear the government will open up public grants to developers who want to build homes to let at “affordable” rents – defined as up to 80% of the full market rate.
He and his 36-year-old wife, Maria, have a household income of £35,000 and rent a newly built affordable home they are planning to buy in Plymouth. They moved there with their three-year-old daughter, Minsa, earlier this year after applying to join the Rentplus rent-to-buy housing scheme.
“It’s a good scheme and I recommend it,” says Rafiq. “Without it, I don’t think we’d ever be able to buy a house.”
The family will pay at least 20% below the market rent for the next five years and will receive a 10% gifted deposit from Rentplus to buy their home at the end of their five-year tenancy. 
“We used to rent a two-bed flat for £620,” says Rafiq. “Now we rent a two-bed house for £545. We’re saving the money we would have spent on rent every month, and it already feels like we are looking after our own house.”
He was unhappy about other aspects of the autumn statement, however, such as the insurance premium tax hike from 10% to 12%. “I’m worried about inflation, so a tax hike is bad news. I’m also disappointed the chancellor is only choosing to raise the personal allowance by £500 next April [to £11,500] and to £12,500 by the end of the parliament. At the moment, on a salary of £35,000, you can hardly meet your expenses if you have a child.”
As an observant Muslim, he avoids interest-paying savings accounts, so instead of the proposed 2.2% government-backed savings bond, he would have liked to see income tax breaks for basic-rate taxpayers who make charitable donations. “Giving to charity is an obligation for Muslims – I donate 2.5% of my wealth to charity as zakat [charitable giving] each year.”
He doesn’t believe the government has done enough to help working families. “My wife is a schoolteacher by profession but she doesn’t work because if she put our daughter in nursery, her entire salary would go on childcare. Childcare should have been made free for all working parents – except if they’re millionaires.”
The government has failed to deliver on its promise to help “just about managing” households, says 34-year-old history teacher Robert Behan – one of the thousands of public sector workers priced out of the housing market in London.
He earns £33,000 while his wife, Alisa, a part-time receptionist, earns £14,000. They spend £157 a week on childcare for their two-year-old son, Sean, and pay £1,100 a month – more than Alisa’s entire take-home pay – to rent a one-bedroom flat in Leyton, east London.
“The housing market in London is out of control,” Behan says. “An affordable rent – where you pay up to 80% of the market rent – is still not affordable in London, and banning letting agent fees is just tinkering round the edges. The government should have opened a national investment bank to fund a huge housebuilding programme. That’s what I’d have liked to see – some kind of revolution to tackle the housing crisis.”
Behan cycles to work to save money, so the fuel duty freeze will not help him. “I’m disappointed about the lack of environmental measures. The government should have announced carbon taxes or incentives to switch away from fossil fuels towards renewable energy providers. I’d also have liked to see more taxes being placed on the super-rich.”
The proposed National Savings & Investments savings bond with a 2.2% interestrate won’t help him either. “We have no savings – we can’t afford to save. We live pay cheque to pay cheque.”
He says if he had been chancellor, he would have recalibrated the London weighting for public sector workers to take account of house price inflation over the past 15 years and the increased cost of renting. 
“Politicians in Westminster don’t have a clue about how the housing market is affecting people. I go into my overdraft at the end of every month. It weighs heavily on my mind.”
A boat-building company on Northern Ireland’s County Down coast believes the extra £250m given to Stormont has boosted the chances of extending the local harbour and creating an extra 300 jobs.
Sea Source, a co-operative business in Kilkeel, has already been lobbying for £36m from the power sharing executive in Belfast to expand the harbour for bigger boats. The chancellor’s announcement of a further £250m for the Northern Ireland executive has increased the company’s optimism.
Davy Hill, one of the co-founders of the enterprise alongside David Campbell, a fisherman and member of the co-operative, said the increase was “hopefully good news for Kilkeel”.
Hill says their plans to increase the harbour’s capacity had already been approved by the Northern Ireland’s strategic investment board. All that was missing until the autumn statement was the extra cash from central government to the regional administration, Hill adds.
“At present we are restricted in the size of boats we can bring into Kilkeel not only to land larger fish catches but also to come in for repairs by our marine engineering unit. If we get that expansion that opens new opportunities for us, creates 300 jobs and secures fishing in the County Down region for the next hundred years.”
He said that one local fishing entrepreneur in the county has built a £30m boat that he cannot sail into Kilkeel at present.
“If some of that £250m is given to us to increase the size of our harbour he has promised us he will take the boat into Kilkeel with his fishing catches. We had the local finance minister Máirtín Ó Muilleoir down here for dinner last week and he supported our project. Now that Philip Hammond has given the Northern Ireland executive extra cash we hope they fulfil that promise and help us to turn our harbour into a marine industrial hub for the future,” Hill adds.
Hill co-founded Sea Source with Alan McCullan and they have created 900 jobs over the past three years. The Sea Source co-operative covers boat building and repair, offshore boat services for energy projects and fish processing.
There was nothing in the autumn statement to make things easier for Rachel Sherman, a mother-of-four in Birmingham. Her family was hit this month by the lowering of the overall benefit cap, which means her housing benefit payments have dropped from about £640 a month to just £2.
She starts a new job this week in a furniture shop, but has only been allocated eight hours’ work, which is not enough to exempt her from the benefit cap. She and her husband – who is recovering from a heart attack – continue to look for other work, but have struggled to find full-time posts. She interviewed for a second job with the retailer Foot Locker on Tuesday, but only four hours’ work a week was on offer, leaving her wondering if she will have to take three jobs in parallel to meet the rent.
“I could juggle three jobs, but you would have to fit each and every job around each other,” she says. “Whether that would be feasible or not, I don’t know.”
Sherman was doing her voluntary job with veterinary charity the PDSA when the chancellor delivered his statement, but looking at the online summary later she could see nothing that might help her situation. “They froze the fuel duty, but we don’t have a car, so that doesn’t affect us at all.” While there were measures to help savers, she said: “We can’t live on the amount we have – if we can’t afford to live, we can’t afford to save.”
She intends to apply for discretionary housing payments to help meet the rent shortfall while she tries to increase her working hours. If this is refused, she thinks the family could face eviction and homelessness.
Sherman recently wrote a list of all the food there is in the cupboards and freezer so she could work out exactly how many meals for six she still has available. “We’re having to use everything that is there to put together meals for the family.”
She would not classify her household as a “just about managing” family. “We are not managing – we don’t know what is around the corner. We are having to manage because we have no choice, but at the same time we are struggling to heat our house and feed our family. This is in no way, shape or form helping our situation.
“My husband and I are trying to get jobs – both of us are doing voluntary work. I am very, very grateful for the small job I have. We are not sat on our bums doing nothing – we are trying to do everything we can. The government is leaving families like ours to struggle. I don’t feel they are doing enough to help. They are taking away from families who need support and leaving us almost in the gutter.”
Rowan Crozier is on the frontline when it comes to all the Brexit uncertainty that economists warn will hit growth next year.
His Birmingham-based manufacturer exports around the world, making connectors for 80% of the world’s kettles. About 70% of its £7m turnover comes from exports, with China and the US its biggest markets.
Like other exporters Brandauer has seen an effect from the weaker pound since the Brexit vote, with some overseas clients attracted by its more competitive pricing. But chief executive Crozier also worries about his costs going up because of the weaker currency.
Stainless steel suppliers have talked about charging more and Brandauer could also see a hit from pricier precious metals. A lot of the components it makes are coated in silver and gold and those metals have gone up this year as a mood of global uncertainty has lifted demand for safe haven investments.
Crozier’s company is being careful on spending and hiring, he says. His biggest worry is how the UK’s lack of a Brexit plan is being viewed by clients. 
“People are just waiting to see what happens and what the plan is,” says Crozier, whose firm employs 57 people.
“People are placing orders a bit later. It used to be eight to 12 weeks in advance, now it tends to be half that.”
The government’s independent forecasters expect a slowdown in business spending to be a key factor behind weaker economic growth next year. Crozier says his experience underscores that gloomier outlook.
“Our customers are slowing their decision-making, their customers are doing the same and we are doing the same. People aren’t reversing decisions but there is a mood of cautiousness.”
Some of the measures in the autumn statement, such as a new productivity fund, were helpful to business in Crozier’s eyes, and he welcomed plans to cut corporation tax to 17% as making the UK a more attractive destination for foreign firms.
But the Birmingham businessman really wants from government is clarity on the Brexit process.
“It doesn’t matter if it’s hard Brexit or soft Brexit. People are getting to the point where they just need to know,” he says.
But he remains hopeful things will improve for the 154-year-old firm after a recent slowdown. “Growth should come back in 2017 as confidence builds but that will only happen if politicians get their act together and clearly tell people what the plan is.”
• This article was amended on 24 November 2016. An earlier version described Ben Geraghty as a “driver” and “moped-rider” for Deliveroo and included inaccurate information about the company’s reimbursement of fuel costs.
In his first autumn statement the chancellor, Philip Hammond, announced that the government will impose a ban to stop letting agents charging “rip-off” fees that cost renters up to £380 million a year.
These fees often cover basic administration, references and credit checks. Tenants have reported being charged for everything from renewing their contracts to changing a name halfway through their term of residence. There are also fees for mid-term inspections and inventory checks.
Hammond’s announcement comes after Citizens Advice reported fees have surged to an average of £337 per tenancy. It’s thought agents are taking advantage of the housing crisis to squeeze extra money out of desperate renters.
What do you think of the chancellor’s plans? Will they help those who rent? Have you been caught out by large letting fees in the past? Have you been shocked by letting agents withholding your deposit, or imposing charges for apparently small matters or nonexistent reasons? And do you worry about rents rising as a result of these changes? What other issuesaround renting need to be addressed? What’s it like to rent in Britain today? Share your stories with us.
A cycle courier who travels up to 50 miles daily has told a tribunal she has a “fear” of getting less work if she does not do what is asked of her in her job.
Maggie Dewhurst, 29, from London, is seeking employment rights and wants courier company CitySprint to recognise her as a “worker” and not an “independent contractor”.
She works from 9.30am to 6.30pm four days a week and said CitySprint’s standard contract was “littered with terms that are inconsistent with the reality of the role”.
Dewhurst said she carries out the work given to her “unless there is a good reason for not doing so” for fear of receiving less work.
The courier, who makes healthcare deliveries, said in her witness statement that she understands why CitySprint and other courier companies “attempt to characterise couriers as a network of independent businesses”.
She said: “It drives down costs and transfers risk. There are, however, consequences to this approach.
“One such consequence is that a large group of people carrying out physically demanding work (in often hazardous conditions) cannot take paid leave.”
Her statement added: “I, like most other cycle couriers, occupy a vulnerable position. The respondent does not guarantee the national minimum wage, provide holiday pay, or sick pay.
“Unfortunately, competition within the sector (particularly in relation to pricing) has tended to be at the expense of the people delivering the work.”
Dewhurst, whose background is in architecture, makes deliveries to a range of hospitals in London, routinely delivering clinical notes, blood and semen samples, and prescriptions including restricted drugs.
She told the employment tribunal in central London that she receives instructions about delivery jobs from a controller, who tells her where to pick something up and where to deliver it to.
Dewhurst said that while it was possible for her to refuse to carry out a job, it is “widely understood” that this is “not a good idea”.
She said in her statement that the controllers would find that “disruptive”, adding: “Ultimately this would impact on the amount of work I am allocated.”
Speaking at the tribunal, she said: “The fear that you’re going to get less work is prevalent.”
She said there was a worry about getting moved “down the pecking order of favouritism”.
Dewhurst also said she was required to book time off in advance and call the office if she was going to be late or sick.
The tribunal comes less than a month after online taxi firm Uber lost a legal battle in which two drivers successfully argued that they were workers rather than self-employed independent operators.
Dewhurst is supported by the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB), which says courier companies have been denying their workers rights such as holiday pay and entitlement to the minimum wage.
The IWGB said it submitted Dewhurst’s case with three other cases against Addison Lee, Excel and eCourier.
IWGB general secretary Jason Moyer-Lee said the tribunal decided that all four cases would be heard at different times but by the same judge and described Dewhurst’s as the “lead case”.
The landmark Uber ruling sparked wider debate about the so-called “gig economy” – an environment where short-term jobs are common, flexibility is considered to be an advantage, while income uncertainty a drawback.
Chancellor’s move is branded a ‘hammer blow for the hard-pressed’, with young drivers and those in London expected to be hardest hit
The “just about managing” will have to continue just about managing, with less money, after the feeble set of giveaways in Philip Hammond’s first – and last – autumn statement.
The chancellor is deviating little from the austerity path set by his predecessor, George Osborne. For most families, the bigger picture of Brexit, and what subsequently happens to jobs, interest rates and economic growth, will far outweigh any tinkering by the Treasury.
Many were left wondering why government advisers focused so heavily on the Jams prior to the statement and then spread the giveaways so thinly.
Yes, there is some softening of cuts to tax credits, now under the umbrella of universal credit. The taper rate – the amount of credit withdrawn as recipients earn more – will fall from 65p to 63p per pound earned over the work allowance. In real terms, it means someone receiving the “national living wage” will gain about £250, while a family earning £30,000 a year will be £500 better off.
However, as the Resolution Foundation thinktank said, these gains were more than outweighed by cuts to the work allowance, which is the amount you can earn before your benefits are tapered away.
The households affected by this will be hit the most by rising food prices, which have a disproportionate impact on poorer Britons. The former Sainsbury’s chief executive Justin King is forecasting an increase of 5% in the coming year, which will wipe out the gains that low-income workers will make from the rise in the national living wage to £7.50 an hour. 
Other unavoidable bills are also marching upwards. The 2% rise in insurance premium tax will add £10.70 to the average bill for cars, and up to £10 to buildings and contents insurance.
Before the autumn statement on Wednesday, it was clear that car insurance rates were already rising sharply, up by 16% over the past year. Even taking into account the shake-up on whiplash, which will cut bills by £40, and the latest freeze in fuel duty, motorists will probably be net losers.
Then there are the scary forecasts of increases in gas and electricity bills of at least 5%, but up to 26% on some tariffs. Household budgets will remain under intense pressure throughout 2017 and beyond.
But the ban on letting agency fees should not be anything other than thoroughly welcomed, irrespective of the predictable bleating from England’s estate agents. What we know is that in Scotland, where the ban has been in place for four years, agents are not in dire straits. 
Hammond also promised another £1.4bn for affordable housing to help build an additional 40,000 homes. Combined with a plethora of schemes, he pledged to “more than double, in real terms, annual capital spending on housing”.
Housing is the central financial worry of the millennial generation, so this is to be welcomed. But whether an uptick in supply will have any real impact on making homes more affordable is another matter.
In one area, Hammond was curiously quiet. Pensioners, the bedrock of Conservative support, were barely mentioned, despite the fact that the state pension is a giant component of public spending. The triple lock, which guarantees rises in the state pension of whatever is higher out of the rate of inflation, average earnings or 2.5%, will be maintained, he said.
But in his next sentence, Hammond warned of the challenges of “rising longevity” and future spending priorities.
Not only was this the last autumn statement, we have probably also seen the last in which giveaways to pensioners are at the heart of the chancellor’s speech.
Insurers and motoring groups have reacted with fury to the government’s announcement that insurance premium tax (IPT) will rise to 12% from June next year.
The tax, which is added to 50m general insurance policies each year including those for cars, homes and private medical cover, had been described in the runup to the statement by the industry as the UK’s “fastest growing stealth tax”.
Announcing the extra 2% increase, the chancellor, Philip Hammond, said IPT rates in the UK remained some of the lowest in Europe and that money was needed to pay for the government’s infrastructure plans. But the Association of British Insurers (ABI) described the increase as a “hammer blow for the hard-pressed”.
From 1 June 2017, most buyers of insurance policies will see the higher 12% rate added to their premium. 
Since IPT was introduced in 1994 at 2.5% it has been steadily increased by successive chancellors. IPT has been hiked three times in the past 18 months: the latest rise – of 0.5%, which took the rate to 10% – came into force just last month, on 1 October. Only as far back as 2010 the rate was just 5%.
Car drivers are likely to feel the worst of the tax hike. Next June’s increase will add around £10 a year to the average car insurance premium, said the AA. Car insurance premiums have been rising steadily – up 16% to an average £586 – as insurers have sought to pass on higher claims costs.
Amanda Blanc, group CEO of one of the UK biggest insurers AXA, said the hike represented an unwarranted attack on millions of people simply looking to protect themselves.
“This is a classic case of the government giving with one hand, in the form of whiplash reforms, and taking with another,” she said. “The affordability of insurance is being fundamentally threatened. The country is already underinsured and ever rising insurance taxation could have the unintended consequence of making this situation even worse.”
The AA said the chancellor had created the illusion of being the motorists’ friend with a freeze on fuel duty, while “pickpocketing drivers” on IPT. Its president, Edmund King, predicted that the extra levy would only add to the 1m uninsured cars on UK roads.
“In 18 months, tax on insurance will have doubled – no other tax has increased by that much,” he said.
IPT was introduced in 1994 to raise revenue from the insurance sector, which was then viewed as being under-taxed. Life insurance, permanent health insurance and all other long-term insurances are exempt. Travel insurance and mechanical breakdown policies are charged 20% IPT, but this remained unchanged in the autumn statement.
Opponents of the tax say it is regressive because it is applied to individual policies – people who have the highest insurance costs pay a disproportionately high rate of IPT.
Young drivers and those living in London – those who pay the highest premiums – will bear the biggest burden, said the AA.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, has delivered his first – and last – autumn statement. He promised to “build an economy that works for everyone”, but what do the measures he announced mean for your finances?
You might be worried about the future of the “triple lock”, which was introduced in 2010 and has seen pensioners receive inflation-busting rises on their income. It means the basic state pension increases by either inflation, growth in average weekly earnings or 2.5%, whichever is highest. The chancellor said that “we will meet our pledge to our country’s pensioners through the triple lock”, but added: “As we look ahead to the next parliament, we will need to ensure we tackle the challenges of rising longevity and fiscal sustainability.” Which sounds like it might be scrapped after that.
There were no changes that would make a difference to the costs associated with buying a property, but those living in rented property while they wait to buy will benefit from a ban on letting agents’ fees if it is introduced as planned. The government will consult on it first.
The chancellor confirmed that he will be looking to ban fees that agents charge tenants. Estate agency shares fell after the announcement, suggesting that this will mean lower profits for some firms.
A new three-year National Savings & Investments bond will be available from spring 2017. The rate is expected to be around 2.2% – better than the top rate currently available on a three-year savings bond, which is 1.63% from Ikano Bank. The bond will allow people to save between £100 and £3,000, and be available to those aged 16 or over. Someone investing the full £3,000 could earn just over £200 in interest after three years. The autumn statement documents confirm the amount you can save in an Isa will rise to £20,000 from April 2017.
The national living wage – George Osborne’s rebranding of the minimum wage for over-25s – is set to rise by 30p an hour to £7.50 from April 2017, benefiting more than a million workers. Younger workers will get smaller increases.
The personal allowance – the sum you can earn each year before paying tax – will increase as planned to £11,500 from April 2017.
Schemes that allow you to cut your tax bill by signing up to gym membership through your employer, or other benefits such as health checks, will disappear – from April 2017 there will be no benefit to these salary sacrifice schemes. The chancellor will still allow tax-efficient arrangements for pensions, childcare, Cycle to Work and ultra-low emission cars. Anything already in place before April will be protected until April 2018, and arrangements for cars, accommodation and school fees will be protected until April 2021.
Deloitte says that a basic rate taxpayer sacrificing £30 a month to use their workplace gym will pay an extra £72 a year in tax, while their employer will pay an extra £50 a year in national insurance.
Fuel duty was frozen again. However, the increase in insurance premium tax from 10% to 12% in June 2017 will add to the cost of buying car insurance. The AA says the average policy will cost £10.70 a year more after the change.
Hammond said that a trial scheme of offering right to buy to housing association tenants would be extended, but to a regional pilot, not right across the country. More than 3,000 tenants will be offered the chance to buy their homes.
Sir Philip Green’s assets, including his £100m superyacht, could be seized by the courts if he refuses to comply with a legal demand to cover the £571m deficit in the BHS pension scheme, the chief executive of the Pensions Regulator (TPR) has said.
Lesley Titcomb told the work and pensions select committee that a court would determine how to raise funds from the billionaire tycoon, including possible seizure of assets, if he does not pay up when a legal demand is issued, or reach a settlement with the regulator.
Titcomb said: “If we are talking about a contribution notice, that creates a normal legally enforceable debt to the scheme and it would then be the scheme trustees or the PPF [the Pension Protection Fund] who, with our full support in any way, shape or form we could offer, would seek to recover that debt through the courts. The courts would determine how that would be achieved.”
It is highly unlikely that Green’s yacht will be seized. However, one pensions expert said the “prospect of the bailiffs on the gangplank” might focus the retail tycoon’s mind on sorting out the BHS pension deficit.
A parliamentary investigation into the demise of the retailer found that BHS had been systematically plundered under its former owners Green and Dominic Chappell.
Green controlled the business for 15 years until he sold it to Chappell, a three-time bankrupt, for £1 in March 2015. Green, his family and other BHS shareholders collected at least £580m from the retailer, while Chappell’s company Retail Acquisitions was paid an estimated £17m.
TPR has started legal proceedings against Green, Chappell and their companies in an attempt to plug the pension deficit. It has issued warning notices to the former owners outlining why they are liable to support the pension scheme.
Green and Chappell now have the opportunity to respond to the warning notices before a determinations panel, an independent body within TPR, decides how much they must contribute to the BHS pension scheme. The determinations panel ruling is a legal demand, but could be appealed all the way to the supreme court by Green and Chappell.
Titcomb said the panel was unlikely to meet until the middle of next year and the “door remains open” to any settlement offers from Green.
TPR is understood be seeking at least £300m from Green and said it is yet to receive a “credible and comprehensive offer”. The tycoon is understood to have offered a deal worth about £300m, but involving a complex structure and payments over many years.
Titcomb declined to provide details of talks with Green, but said the regulator had to consider a range of factors in any pension deal. “It’s not just about money, it may be about the structure of any deals,” she said.
Pushed by Frank Field, the chair of the select committee, about whether TPR could demand assets from Green, particularly his family’s superyacht Lionheart, she said the regulator did not have the power to freeze assets and it would be for the courts to decide how to recover any unpaid legal demand.
On the makeup of any settlement or willing payment from Green to a legal demand, she said: “If there is a settlement or financial support directive, then essentially what we are looking for there is some form of support for the scheme, which could be cash, guarantees or some other structure.
“There is a great deal of flexibility there in terms of what could be taken into account. Having said that, whatever is proposed under either of these routes, we would have to be absolutely sure it is robust and doesn’t create a continuing risk to either the members of the scheme or the PPF. For example, we would want to ensure that any assets that were offered would be properly valued. We wouldn’t just take any offer.”
However, Green will almost certainly not offer the yacht as part of any settlement. If the courts are forced to chase cash from him, they can target a family empire estimated to be worth more than £3bn, which includes property in London and the retail business Arcadia, which owns Topshop, Dorothy Perkins and Miss Selfridge.
The courts could find it difficult to make legal claims on any of the Green family’s assets, given that many of these are under the name of Lady Green and part of a network of offshore companies unconnected to BHS.
Titcomb said: “Our warning notices are targeted at certain targets, so the debt would be collected against these targets and the court would have to go through the normal process of assessing that target’s assets.”
She said TPR was “relentlessly” pursuing the best possible outcome for the 20,000 members of the BHS pension scheme.
Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the prospect of bailiffs seizing Green’s yacht would be “peculiarly appealing” to many people.
He said: “His failure to offer the regulator a comprehensive and credible deal on the BHS pension scheme six months on from his promise to ‘sort it out’ has left no option but to pursue legal enforcement.
“The process will take many months yet though and there is always the possibility that he will yet make an acceptable offer – just possibly the prospect of the bailiffs on the gangplank will focus his mind. In the meantime, the scheme members continue to enjoy the security of the PPF lifeboat scheme, with the hope that a better deal may eventually be secured on their behalf.”
No plans for further welfare savings measures in this parliament beyond those already announced.
RM: Hammond is keeping Osborne’s idea of a welfare cap but does not resist a dig at his predecessor as he raises it to a more ‘realistic level’. He commits to no further welfare cuts than those already announced but the retention of a cap will dash the hopes of those MPs, including some Tories, who want him to reverse cuts to universal credit.
RM: This is a naked piece of political mudslinging as Hammond spends several minutes extolling the greatness of the mansion that inspired Jane Austen’s Pemberley in Pride and Prejudice, which he claims was threatened by opencast mining nearby that was authorised by a previous Labour government. However desperate the need for repairs, there may be eyebrows raised at the sum going to the house and prominence given to one residence during Hammond’s short speech.
£10bn of additional funding a year by the end of 2020-21.
£3.5bn of cuts as previously announced but Ministry of Justice to get funding for more prison officers.
Fall to 17% as planned by 2020.
Salary sacrifice schemes to be scaled back, with some exceptions such as cycling schemes.
Raise £2bn over the forecast period, £630m from targeting schemes such as the flat rate VAT scheme and use of employee shareholder status. There will also be a new penalty for repeated use of tax avoidance schemes.
From April 2017 align the employee and employer NI thresholds at £157 per week.
The taper rate at which universal credit is withdrawn as earnings rise to be reduced from 65p to 63p at a cost of £1bn from April.
RM: This is designed to incentivise people on part-time jobs to increase their hours, as it will slow the rate at which in-work benefits are withdrawn for those on universal credit. It has been welcomed by campaigners as a first step, but Iain Duncan Smith, the former work and pensions secretary, has said it does not go far enough.
New NS&I bond offering 2.2% interest rate on three-year product, to be announced in the budget.
RM: Hammond has a reputation for being dull but this seemed to be an attempt at a dry joke. He announced dramatically that he was about to abolish the autumn statement, giving the impression he was about to resign, before simply switching to an autumn budget and spring statement. The spring statement will no longer be a major fiscal event but a response to economic forecasts produced twice a year by the OBR.
Shares in some of Britain’s biggest estate agencies fell sharply on Wednesday as the chancellor used his first autumn statement to ban upfront fees charged by letting agents.
Roughly £70m was wiped off the combined value of Foxtons and Countrywide after Philip Hammond confirmed a clampdown to prevent tenants from being forced to pay administrative costs for simple things such as inventory and reference checks.
The move by Hammond to ban letting fees for people who rent their homes forms part of the government’s ambition to do more for Britain’s so-called “Jams” – those families “just about managing”.
Foxtons was the sector’s biggest faller, with shares down almost 14%. Countrywide was down 6%, while LSL Property and Savills also fell.
The Association of Residential Letting Agents reacted with anger to the changes. David Cox, its managing director, said it would be counterproductive because the costs would be passed on to landlords who would, in turn, raise rents.
He said: “A ban on letting agent fees is a draconian measure, and will have a profoundly negative impact on the rental market.
“It will be the fourth assault on the sector in just over a year, and do little to help cash-poor renters save enough to get on the housing ladder. This decision is a crowd-pleaser, which will not help renters in the long term. All of the implications need to be taken into account.”
Announcing his autumn statement to parliament, Hammond said fees charged often spiralled to hundreds of pounds.
He said: “In the private rental market, letting agents are currently able to charge unregulated fees to tenants. This is wrong. Landlords appoint letting agents and landlords should meet their fees. So I can announce today that we will ban fees to tenants as soon as possible.”
Neil Wilson, a market analyst at ETX, said it was another blow for the sector, which had already been hit hard following the UK’s Brexit vote in June.
He said: “News of a ban on charging fees to tenants comes as a hammer blow to embattled estate agents. Shares in estate agents opened sharply lower as the government plans to ban upfront fees charged by letting agents.
“Estate agents have suffered since the Brexit vote – shares in Foxtons are still trading down around 30% from their pre-referendum level amid falling client activity. Countrywide stock is now worth a third of what it was in May 2015.”
“Does it just mean that I’m in a sticky situation?” Rachel Sherman, mother of four, asks, wondering if her household classifies as a just-about-managing family, or in the dispiriting new political acronym, a Jam.
She is in a difficult situation financially, but questions whether the family should be described as just about managing, or more realistically, as one that is teetering on the edge of catastrophe, a Toteoc, or as one which is not OK by any stretch of the imagination, a Nobasoti (neither expression yet in political usage).
She is due to start a new job this week in a furniture shop, but has only been given an eight-hour-a-week contract, which leaves her and her husband (struggling to find work after a heart attack) with a huge shortfall, since the lowering of the overall benefit cap earlier this month reduced her housing benefit payments from about £640 a month to 50p.
It is not yet clear how they will manage. She forced a smile when each of her children had to take in a £1 donation last Friday for Children in Need, eating into the small pot now set aside for food. “Our whole family as a unit is in need,” she says. “I agree with the idea of people getting off benefits and into work; I understand and that’s right, but this pressure is making it harder. My husband has applied for well over 100 jobs this month, and he can’t get an interview.”
From the bottom of the income scale to families with a reasonably good income who are still struggling, a wide spectrum of families in Birmingham are hoping that they might be the just-about-managing families that Theresa May and Philip Hammond have in their sights for extra support in the autumn statement. Expectation is huge, and the disappointment is set to be palpable.
The constituency of Erdington voted strongly Brexit in the EU referendum and is one of the poorest in the country, with pockets of acute deprivation. Because of its location close to the Jaguar Land Rover Castle Bromwich site, it also has relatively well-paid workers, many of whom are finding that wage stagnation and rising living costs have also left them in difficulty.
Lauren Hampshire, 28, employed here as a family support worker, is capable, ambitious, professional and stuck. With a degree and postgraduate qualifications in early-years education, she works full-time, helping families who need advice with parenting and budgeting. Meanwhile, at home, she is worrying about her own budgeting issues as she tries to keep up mortgage payments and pay for nursery for her 18-month-old son.
“I did my education, I’ve bought a house, I’ve tried to do it all the right way, but there isn’t a lot of support when you’re left as a single parent. I’m just getting through each week, trying to manage,” she says. Planned local authority cuts for 2017 mean her job in the Castle Vale children’s centre is under threat, as the council decides which children’s services to shut down.
“I feel there is nowhere for me to go, there is no ladder for me to climb up. Nursery schools and children’s centres are at risk of closing and if they don’t actually close, they are at risk of massive budget reductions. Staff will be lost,” she says. “If I lost my job it would be devastating. I could apply for other jobs, but it is hard, because everyone is looking for budget cuts in this line of work so everyone is in the same boat, including management. If you think about it too much you can get quite down about it.”
For the moment she is just about managing by being careful not to buy new clothes for herself and by eating meals at her parents’ house whenever they are offered.
Clare Yates, 30, who has two daughters, one 14 months and the other three years old, is also hoping for more help with childcare costs. She lost her job with a catering company contracted to make breakfast for Jaguar workers when she was pregnant with her second child. “They said I wasn’t up to standard, that I was working too slowly, but I think they wanted me out because I was pregnant,” she says. Worries about her family’s financial situation have recently pushed her to ask her doctor for antidepressants, which she says are helping with the anxiety. “I worry about money all the time. It would help if there was more free childcare, so I could go back to work.”
Fifty-year-old Anne (who asked for her real name not to be published, because she was uneasy about talking about her financial predicament), a senior teaching assistant in Erdington who has worked in the same nursery school for 27 years, is also finding keeping up with her mortgage payments difficult. She extended the mortgage twice to meet household bills as she brought up three children, the youngest of whom is 16.
She recently received a letter from the bailiffs over costs related to late payment of council tax, and although she has decided to ignore it, the worrying memory of the letter keeps popping back into her mind. She has considered taking up a second job, but her hours at school are already quite long. She loves her job and is puzzled that, given how crucial the work is, her pay (more than £20,000) leaves her barely managing at all.
“I’m up at 6am and usually at work until five. At the end of the day you have to sleep,” she says. “I do struggle on what I get. I live in my overdraft, which is ridiculous. The wages come in, and the overdraft gets paid off and there’s nothing left. We haven’t been on holiday for five or six years because there hasn’t been extra money. We go to the market now to buy trainers, not to JD’s. I buy ‘smart price’, own-brand cornflakes, rather than Kellogg’s, and I still get to the checkout and think, ‘That’s come to a lot again.’”
She says her salary hasn’t risen much in a decade – “You don’t notice your annual increment, it’s just pennies” – and she also worries that her job will be at risk next year with the next round of council cuts threatening nursery services.
In central Birmingham, at the National Express depot, senior skilled workers, whose wages used to put them automatically in a comfortable bracket, are also considering whether their current income makes them the kind of workers that the prime minister wants to offer extra support.
Peter (also not his real name, because he was worried about saying anything that might upset his employer) has been working for the company as an engineer for more than three decades since he was a teenage apprentice. He says his £12-an-hour rate no longer goes as far as it once did. He is grateful to bosses who this year allowed him to increase his overtime schedule so he now works Saturdays and Sundays to boost his take-home pay – he never previously had to work both days of the weekend. “I work hard, but the family struggles when you work weekends,” he says. A father of two whose wife works part-time in a shop, he has only been able to meet his mortgage payments because he puts in long hours and works antisocial shifts.
He voted leave in the referendum, concerned about the impact of immigration. “I haven’t got a problem with immigrants. I’m all for getting people into this country who will make a difference, but you shouldn’t go flooding the country, otherwise schools and hospitals won’t be able to cope,” he says. A Labour voter, he is not expecting much from the autumn statement, but he wishes the government would speed up the implementation of Brexit. “In a democracy, don’t you go with the majority?”
It’s not as ancient as it looks: the vendor’s grandparents built it into the side of a hill in the 19th century and it draws aerial views of the surrounding mountains to the coast three miles away. Nor at £136,500 is it a bargain, as the place is derelict and needs thousands of pounds thrown at it to make it habitable. Apparently a preservation order only applies to the exterior, which means you should be able to make of the inside what you will. You’ll be left with a dramatic perch above this village of caves close to Alicante airport and the Costa Blanca. Kyero
As someone who still watches TV on a black and white set, can I use BBC iPlayer with a black and white licence? SR, by email
As you won’t be surprised to learn, TV Licensing says no. It explains that since the digital switchover (completed in 2012), a black and white licence has only been valid if you connect a black and white TV to a digital box that can’t record. This is because DVD, VHS and digital box recorders record in colour.
“If you watch or record on any other device, for example by watching iPlayer on a tablet, computer or phone, you will require a colour TV licence,” it says.
Amazingly, it told us that around 9,300 people still have black and white licences – or did in December 2015, the last time figures were published. Not snooker fans, presumably.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
The most eye-catching policies in Philip Hammond’s autumn statement are those designed to help the “just about managing” families – from a ban on letting agents’ fees to slightly softening the blow of benefit cuts for those in work.
The most significant move is a change to the new universal credit welfare system that softens the pace of withdrawal of in-work benefits for claimants as they increase their hours.
It will help about 3 million people, although experts from the Resolution Foundation thinktank have warned it will in no way compensate for the scale of cuts to the work allowance – a benefit replacing tax credits – that hits new claimants on universal credit.
A second flagship policy for the just about managing families – known as Jams – is a proposed ban on fees for letting agents.
This policy was opposed by Conservative ministers until very recently. David Cameron’s election team put out a press release in April 2015 saying Ed Miliband’s plan to do the same would increase rents for “hardworking families”.
A large affordable housing programme is a third measure for the Jams, who tend to be defined as households earning £15,000 to £30,000 a year.
There will be an additional £1.4bn to encourage construction of 40,000 such homes, although Labour said it was “too little, too late” given the deep cuts to housing investment in 2010, which have meant that the supply of affordable places to live has never caught up.
Another measure for low earners is a boost to the “national living wage” announced by George Osborne earlier this year.
It will go up from £7.20 per hour to £7.50, although the pace of this increase does not appear to be enough to reach the target of £9 by 2020 promised by the former chancellor.
A crackdown on fraudulent whiplash claims is an additional modest measure aimed at helping the Jams, as it is designed to bring down car insurance costs by about £40 annually.
The Ministry of Justice has proposed either scrapping the right to compensation for minor whiplash injuries or putting a cap on the amount people can claim.
Infrastructure investment will be the second major plank of Hammond’s policy announcements, particularly aimed at improving productivity of the workforce.
The chancellor will deploy more than £1bn to boost broadband speeds for up 2 million homes and businesses – despite the fact that millions of other homes are not yet connected at all – and another £1.3bn of new investment in roads, primarily targeted at small projects to relieve traffic congestion.
When Rory Gray moved into a one-bed flat in Exeter last year, it wasn’t the £650 a month rent that really irked him – but the £800 in fees demanded by the letting agent, part of Britain’s biggest agency, Countrywide.
Countrywide’s local agent in Exeter expected the tenant to pay £360 as a “tenancy fee”, £90 for “admin”, £60 for “referencing”, £90 for the “check-in”, £90 for a “guarantor” and £120 for the “deed of guarantee”. He chose not to move in at the weekend; if he had there would be a further £72 for “Saturday check-in”. All this was on top of the deposit, which meant that he would have to cough up £2,300 before getting his hands on the keys to the flat.
“When I saw their breakdown of costs they were complete nonsense – £300 for a tenancy agreement [£360 with VAT] which I was told was a standard agreement they use for all tenants. So they simply print off their standard agreement and charge £300,” he told the Guardian.
Countrywide said its fees are transparent and in line with Advertising Standards Authority guidelines. But nothing infuriates Generation Rent more than eye-watering fees to letting agents, sometimes paid again and again as they move from one insecure tenancy to the next.
The 250,000 tenants who have signed the “Make Renting Fair” petition will be jubilant they are to be banned. “I have paid as little as £80 and as much as £552 in agency fees on different fees. How is it possible that fees can vary so much from agency to agency? It’s a rip-off and the agents are getting away with it, all the way to the bank,” said Vicky Spratt, who set up the campaign.
The long boom in buy-to-let had made lettings a highly lucrative business – until now. London agency Foxtons says the profit margin on lettings is about 30%. Lettings revenue growth at Your Move and Marsh & Parsons was 12% in both 2014 and 2015, much faster than other parts of the business.
But when the ban comes into force will it simply mean the rent goes up instead?
Fortunately we can look to Scotland for guidance. Since a ruling in 2012, tenants in Scotland can only be asked for just the rent and the deposit – everything else has to be paid by the landlord.
Housing charity Shelter has carried out detailed research on the impact. It found that landlords in Scotland were no more likely to have increased rents after the ban came into force than landlords elsewhere in the UK.
But Scottish letting agent groups disagree, arguing that rents rose when fees were banned. A House of Commons select committee decided the evidence was inconclusive.
What will happen in England and Wales? Letting agencies will probably see their profit margins shaved. Many landlords will have to accept a rise in fees. And in places rents will no doubt rise. But tenants will argue, understandably, that this is a much fairer outcome than the current mish-mash of largely inexplicable charges.
Philip Hammond will cushion the blow of deep cuts to in-work benefits for “just about managing” households, as he delivers his first autumn statement.
The chancellor will seek to placate backbench rebels, including former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith, by reducing the so-called taper rate at which universal credit is withdrawn as recipients’ earnings rise, from 65p to 63p in every pound.
The measure will cost the Treasury a total of £1bn over the next five years. But Hammond will reject calls to reverse the other key plank of his predecessor George Osborne’s cuts: the much larger, £3bn-a-year reduction in the work allowance – the amount recipients can earn before their benefits start to be taken away.
Campaign group 38 Degrees has gathered more than 218,000 signatures on a petition to reverse the planned reductions to universal credit set in train by Osborne.
Trish Murray, campaigner at 38 Degrees, said: “Our members are really worried that if the cuts to universal credit go ahead, it’ll become impossible for people that are already struggling to make ends meet. Rising food bills and sky high rents mean it’s already difficult for many families to afford the basics – and people from across the country have told us these cuts will make paying the bills even harder.
The Resolution Foundation thinktank welcomed the concession from the Treasury but warned that it would still be more than outweighed by the losses from the lower work allowance.
Its analysis suggests a full-time worker on the government’s “national living wage” would gain up to £250 a year from Hammond’s 2p reduction in the taper rate, rising to around £500 a year for a family earning £30,000. That compares to losses of up to £2,800 a year from the work allowance changes.
Torsten Bell, director of the Resolution Foundation, said: “When it comes to boosting ‘just [about] managing’ family budgets, all roads lead to universal credit. The most effective way to support families would be by reversing the £3bn cut to work allowances announced by the last chancellor.
He said a modest reduction in the taper rate would instead “leave a bittersweet taste among just about managing families”.
Analysis by the Institute for Public Policy Research suggested the partial U-turn would cost £700m a year by 2020/21 — compared with the £3bn a year taken out of work allowances previously announced.
Alfie Stirling, IPPR senior economic analyst, said: “Any change to reverse some of the impact of cuts to universal credit is to be welcomed, but the government are only giving back a small slice of what has previously been cut.”
The chancellor has been under pressure to soften cuts pencilled in by Osborne after last year’s general election, as he sought to meet the Conservatives’ manifesto pledge to slice £12bn from the cost of the welfare state.
Osborne, who was sacked by Theresa May in July, was forced into an embarrassing U-turn at last year’s autumn statement over planned reductions to tax credits. But he left in place reductions for universal credit – the new benefits system that is being slowly rolled out across the country.
The announcement is the latest of a series of decisions made by May’s government to moderate the impact of some of the harshest aspects of the welfare system overseen by David Cameron.
Work and pensions secretary Damian Green, a close ally of the prime minister, has made a series of changes – including scrapping six monthly check ups for chronically ill patients claiming disablity benefits and pledged that there will be no additional welfare cuts in this parliament.
But cuts such as thesharp reduction in the “benefits cap”, which limits the total amount a single household can claim, will cost 88,000 families more than £2,000 a year and have already been implemented.
Conservative backbench rebels, who have been urging Hammond to reverse the cuts, signalled that they welcomed the changes to taper rates – but would not give up the fight to make the system more generous.
Critics including Heidi Allen, David Burrowes and Johnny Mercer had all expressed concerns that increasing the taper rate would undermine work incentives for struggling families.
Duncan Smith, who resigned in the wake of Osborne’s final budget in March over cuts to disability payments, had urged Hammond to make changes. Allies said he would welcome any move to plough money back into universal credit, the system he designed.
Shadow chancellor John McDonnell said: “It would appear that this autumn statement is set to fail our first test to provide actual support for those on low and middle incomes.”
“If all the chancellor is offering is a 2% change in the taper rate then it will be too little, too late for those working families who have had to bear the brunt of six wasted years of failed Tory economic policies.”
Osborne’s controversial redesign of the universal credit system was one of the most contested elements of his deficit-reduction strategy, which Hammond is expected to rewrite on Wednesday. The Conservatives fought the 2015 general election on a pledge to cut £12bn from the welfare bill, but without detailed proposals about how they would do so.
As well as universal credit, the Labour frontbench, and Tory MPs, have been pushing for changes to planned cuts to the employment support allowance for disabled people.
GDP Economic growth is slowing. A 2% forecast for next year is expected to be revised down to nearer 1%.
Disposable incomes Household spending power has risen in the past two years after wages rises of 2% to 2.5% outstripped zero inflation. Inflation is now expected to hit between 2% and 3% with wages growth at around 2%, eating into disposable incomes.
Exports The amount the UK sells abroad has fallen as a proportion of GDP for decades. The OBR will want to avoid accusations of political interference if it forecasts a post-Brexit acceleration of the trend.
The annual deficit A shortfall that reached £155bn in 2009/10 was forecast in March to fall to £55.5bn in 2016/17. The OBR is expected to say its forecast was wrong, and it will be nearer £65bn.
Public investment Ahead of the autumn statement, the chancellor has announced around £5bn of extra spending, but there could be more to come.
Whitehall departmental spending After a deep cut in 2014 and a boost last year, another easing in austerity is expected.
Welfare spending Universal credit will taper for longer, Hammond says, allowing recipients to keep more of the benefit. Pensions costs keep escalating, pushing up the overall benefits bill.
Productivity From 2010 onwards the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), the Treasury’s independent forecasting unit, has assumed a 2% annual gain in productivity. It hasn’t happened and another downgrade is expected.
Personal allowance The chancellor could begin to honour the Conservative manifesto pledge to raise the threshold at which individuals start paying income tax to £12,500, or raise the £8,060 level where national insurance kicks in.
Higher rate threshold The manifesto also promised to raise the threshold for the 40p rate to £50,000 by the end of the parliament after a succession of freezes during the coalition years.
Fuel duty The car lobby wants a cut in fuel duty to offset inflationary rises in petrol, but a freeze is more likely.
Insurance premium tax A favourite target of George Osborne, it is a below the radar tax rise on households and could be used again to raise money.
Air passenger duty A cut is possible to help families hit by dearer holiday costs.
Pensions cold calling The government’s pension freedoms sparked a stampede by savers to extract cash from their pension pots. Fraudsters sought to exploit this situation by cold calling to sell dodgy vehicles for the money. A ban is on the way.
Employee benefits An increase in taxes on employee benefits would be one way to prevent tax “leakage”. At the moment millions of people can swap taxed salary for bike purchases and gym membership. This perk could be scrapped, saving tens of millions of pounds.
New measures for savers The amount that savers can put aside in ISAs before incurring tax could be raised.
Housebuilding A £5bn homebuilding fund was mooted to deal with Britain’s housing shortage. But the chancellor has put forward a £1.4bn “injection” to support the building of 40,000 homes.
Transport A £1.3bn road improvement scheme will aim to tackle bottlenecks and fix potholes.
Digital A £1bn scheme will push ahead with trials for 5G mobile access and superfast one gigabit broadband.
R&D Theresa May said there would be £2bn extra for science and R&D spending over the next four years – the chancellor will provide details.
Corporation tax The Conservatives want to bring the headline rate down from 20% to 17%, and Theresa May has hinted she wants it lower – but it is already the lowest in the G20 and the chancellor could delay further cuts.
Business rates New rateable values come into effect next April. Businesses, especially those in expensive parts of the south-east, have lobbied for the government to delay implementation.
Bank levy Reductions in the levy scheduled over the next five years could be accelerated as banks consider whether to stay in the UK post Brexit.
Machines will allow the user to tap their card on a reader, or even use their smartphone, to make a withdrawal
As a woman you could be excused for feeling pretty disheartened about what the future holds right now, particularly given global events like the US election results. 
Closer to home, figures released by the Workplace Gender Equality Agency that show men in Australia earn on average nearly $27,000 a year more than women and that five out of six chief executives are male probably didn’t provide much respite from that feeling.
These and other disheartening factors have a compounding, negative effect on a woman’s superannuation savings. Superannuation is what many Australians plan to rely on during retirement, yet the average man retires with nearly twice the balance of that of the average woman’s superannuation. While women’s participation in the workforce is at its highest point since 1978 at 57.9%, it is still 12 percentage points lower than the male participation rate. 
Consequently too many women are reaching retirement age skirting dangerously close to experiencing poverty and homelessness – and they are experiencing this in increasing numbers.
Yet while it’s a gloomy picture, there’s much activity under way globally, all striving to see these issues addressed.
Many of the new UN sustainable development goals released last year identify recognising women’s equality and empowerment as both an objective, and as part of the solution. Goal five is aimed specifically at achieving gender equality and empowering all women and girls.
These goals are a tool to ignite change around the world that addresses some of our key challenges like poverty and inequality. But to make that change we must start locally and it will take action from everyone.
It will take work from government, from unions, from academics, from communities – but most importantly – work from business.
So much of the inequality women experience is attached to the workplace: their pay levels, the way caring responsibilities are valued and the representation of women in leadership roles.
There’s so much work to be done in this space. For example we know pregnancy- and carer-related discrimination can impact on the labour force participation of women. This happens when employers issue demotions, redundancies, or refuse to allow flexible work conditions, so that women simply leave rather than fight the unfair practices they face.
Similarly we know the disparity between women and men in leadership roles in the workplace perpetuates existing stereotypes about the role of women both at work and in broader society, and exacerbates gender pay inequity.
But if we start having more women in leadership roles, it operates as an encouragement to other women in the workplace. Women’s leadership is so important in ensuring that more women are in positions where they have the authority to decide and negotiate on issues that affect them.
To achieve this, we need to start ensuring women get the critical experiences that are required for advancement in an organisation. At the moment, the unfortunate experience is women are routinely – often through unconscious gender-bias – funnelled into less advantageous areas of an organisation’s operations. They are less likely to be offered “mission-critical roles” or profile-building opportunities that facilitate career progression. Similarly, sponsorship is often key to advancement into senior roles and women are less likely to have sponsors.
Succession planning in organisations needs to have a gendered lens so that barriers to women’s advancement into senior roles are eliminated.
These examples show that without a commitment from business to change, attempts to end gender inequality in this country just won’t work.
That’s why the New South Wales Council of Social Service has started working not only with business but with the National Women’s Alliances, community organisations, unions and academics to chart a plan of how we get there. Together.
What is exciting – and what gives me hope – is the willingness we are seeing from all these areas to pursue change.
In August this year, 100 representatives from all these sectors came together to make a start at the New Year for Women conference. Representatives from superannuation funds, banks, developers, advocacy groups, unions, government, community services and universities were there, and we had both men and women in the room. We all agreed to pursue better financial literacy outcomes for young women, better representation for women at work, better superannuation outcomes for all women and to reduce older women’s homelessness.
And this shouldn’t be surprising really. Because it’s not just women that benefit from reducing gender inequality, it’s everyone.
Because reducing it is not just about giving us all a warm fuzzy feeling, it will significantly boost our economy. Goldman Sachs JBWere estimated that closing the gap between male and female employment rates would boost Australia’s GDP by 11%. According to the same report, if we channelled women into more economically productive – and higher paid – employment, it would increase GDP by 20%.
So it’s evident that gender equality is good for the country, good for all Australians, good for the world. And it’s work that must be done now.
• Tracy Howe will be speaking on SDG5 (gender equality) at the SDGA16 conference in Sydney on 29-3o November
Millions of families who are being charged hundreds of pounds by agencies to cover the supposed administrative costs of renting will be offered relief when Philip Hammond promises to ban letting fees.
The chancellor will unveil the measure in the autumn statement on Wednesday alongside a £1.4bn investment in affordable housing as he tries to deliver on Theresa May’s promise to help families who are “just about managing” – or “Jams”.
The boost for housing, in addition to a fund that is already worth £4.7bn, is expected to help build 40,000 new homes and would allow providers more flexibility to offer people lower rents.
The eye-catching ban on letting fees, which would come into place after a consultation, follows campaigns by both the Labour party and a Lib Dem peer, Olly Grender.
They claimed that renters were being asked to pay hundreds of pounds for questionable reasons such as inventory checks.
However, just two months ago the housing minister, Gavin Barwell, tweeted that such a move would be a “bad idea – landlords would pass cost to tenants via rent”.
Other measures designed to target the so-called Jams include:
Hammond is also expected to use the first major financial statement of a chancellorship likely to be dominated by Brexit to announce sharply weaker forecasts for GDP growth and the public finances.
The figures from the OBR follow predictions from City forecasters that economic growth will slide from around 2% this year to little more than 1% in 2017.
Meanwhile, the city credit ratings agency Moody’s warned that just managing families may find themselves unable to service their car loans and mortgages as a result of by rising inflation caused by Brexit.
The ban on letting fees comes despite Barwell’s comments and the fact that the Conservative government led by David Cameron fiercely resisted calls by the Labour party for the change just six months ago.
The Conservative party press office put out a statement saying that Ed Miliband’s policy would “lead to higher rents” while the same message was delivered by the local government minister, Marcus Jones, who is still in position.
He told MPs in the House of Commons: “Banning or capping letting agent fees would not make renting any cheaper for tenants – tenants would still end up paying but through higher rents.”
The issue is disputed with National Landlords Association chief executive, Richard Lambert, agreeing that the cost would “boomerang” back on to private tenants.
While he admitted that some unscrupulous agents have got away with excessive fees, Lambert said: “Agents will have no other option than to shift the fees on to landlords, which many will argue is more appropriate, since the landlord employs the agent. But adding to landlords’ costs, on top of restricting their ability to deduct their business costs from their taxable income, will only push more towards increasing rents.”
He said Hammond “lacks an understanding of how the whole sector works”.
However, Shelter – which found letting fees are on average £300 but can reach more than £500 – insisted that the evidence from Scotland, where a ban is already in place, is that rents did not rise.
The charity welcomed the moves on housing in the autumn statement but said the “devil will be in the detail”.
“At Shelter we see the impact of our chronic shortage of affordable homes every day, with increasing numbers of people left with no choice but to fork out most of their hard-earned wages on expensive private rents, and wave goodbye to the chance of a stable home,” said the charity’s chief executive, Campbell Robb.
The shadow housing secretary, John Healey, added that his party had long backed “ending sky-high letting fees for renters” and pointed out that Conservative MPs, including May and Hammond, had voted against the move.
Lady Grender, who is the author of a private members bill on renters’ rights that proposed the change and was being discussed in parliament as recently as Friday, said: “Our relentless campaigning to get tenants’ letting fees banned has finally paid off and the government has recognised this is the right thing to do. The upfront costs of renting are far too high, pushing many people into debt just to pay the fees, and stopping others from being able to move into a rented home.”
She wrote to the prime minister to highlight the issue when she first came into office, and received a response in which May said: “I appreciate your comments regarding the private rented sector and I agree that tackling concerns about housing will be an important part of building a country that works for everyone.”
Sources said the chancellor was expected to spend Tuesday evening putting the finishing touches on his speech at No 11, having moved into the Downing Street flat less than a fortnight ago. 
Hammond’s speech will start at 12.30pm after prime minister’s questions and is likely to be significantly shorter than those of his predecessor, George Osborne. The so-called red book of fiscal measures will also be slimmer, reflecting a desire to focus on broad-brush headline measures rather than micromanaging the spending of departments.
Ahead of the event, Hammond has spoken to more than 100 businesses and organisations to get a sense of their perspective on the post-referendum economy. His big theme on the day will be boosting spending on infrastructure and productivity, as well as the string of small measures to help families that are just managing.
After the speech, David Gauke, the chief secretary to the Treasury, will be sent out on to the airwaves to explain the overarching points of the statement. He is a veteran of the Treasury and was often used in a similar way by Osborne after big announcements.
Black Friday is almost upon us, or rather it’s already upon us: many retailers launched their annual sales on Tuesday or even earlier. After playing it down last year – after some violence the year before – everybody is now seeking to spread it out, hoping to maximise profits while minimising chaos. Morrisons is advertising a Black Five Days. Renault’s Black Friday – if you’re thinking of just getting everybody cars for Christmas – lasts until the end of the month.
It’s odd how the Friday part remains central to this extended period of price-slashing. Black Friday is, as everybody knows, a US import with no comparable significance in the UK. The day after Thanksgiving Thursday is traditionally when Americans find themselves at a dangerous loose end: they’re not at work, and they’ve had just about enough of the company of relatives. On Friday you either go shopping or go home.
When I was growing up in Connecticut it was called Black Friday because the traffic was so terrible that people warned one another not to venture out. Before the late 1980s no retailer would have used the term, with all its negative associations, to advertise a sale. Apparently there were some early attempts to rechristen it Big Friday, but the old name stuck, and rightly so: the traffic only got worse. It’s not a tradition we Americans would have wished on anyone else.
Now that the British version spreads across a week or more, you could really pick any day as its focus. Unfortunately, all the other Black Days are taken, most of them more than once. Black Tuesday commemorates the stock market crash of October 29, 1929. Black Monday refers to the day before, but also to another crash, in October 1987. Black Wednesday has been assigned to Britain’s departure from the European exchange rate mechanism in 1992.
You might just as well pick another colour, but that would be missing the point. The name Black Friday perfectly captures the heedless, bushfire rapacity of the event. It still retains a little of its original definition, alongside the perverse positive spin. And there’s that final layer of context: the irony of lost irony. In America, Black Friday means something. It’s not good, but it’s something.
These are challenging times for Daily Mail readers, with so few certainties to peddle. On one page a story about “alt-right” irritant Milos Yiannopoulis not being allowed to speak at his old grammar (the school’s decision, although the Department for Education’s counter-extremism unit got involved) is headlined “CENSORED!” On another, a presenter’s not-very-good impression of Melania Trump is labelled potentially racist.
I’ll grant you things do get morally fuzzy up at the hate speech end of free speech. Whose side do you take? The former pupil unable to regale sixth-formers with the kind of talk that got him no-platformed from Twitter? Or the privileged supermodel who violates the safe space that televised awards ceremonies have traditionally provided? It gives me no pleasure to admit there are no right answers.
To blur the lines further, the model-presenter in question, Gigi Hadid, apologised, while Yiannopoulis wrote, “Perhaps if I’d called my talk, ‘MUSLIMS ARE AWESOME!’ the [National Union of Teachers] NUT and the Department of Education would have been cool with me speaking.”
Freedom of expression is vital but messy. We shouldn’t allow the cast of some no-account smash hit Broadway musical to bang on about inalienable rights when the vice-president-elect is in the audience – that’s just rude. But we can’t let our schools institute some kind of blanket no-idiots policy when it comes to guest speakers. They’d never get anyone.
How is “helping low-income families to save” a measure to help the “just about managing” (Hammond told to help families ‘just managing’, 18 November)? On a low income you don’t have money to save. With low savings rates, saving doesn’t confer much benefit. On a modestly good income when I was young, it was very difficult to save the amount recommended for my pension.
Our politicians should have experience of the real world. Maybe we should raise the age to become an MP and insist on demonstrating experience of working in a public sector. Going from a privileged background, studying politics and then entering parliament is not a recipe for a fairer society and understanding the problems of the disadvantaged.
Short-term gains to companies in off-shoring and outsourcing jobs, leaves us with failing public services; an outsourcer has to make a profit, resulting in lesser-quality services. People cannot swap work sectors easily. Our education system has in the main lagged behind science and technology. No chance of employment in their sphere of experience and inadequate retraining leads to an increase in reliance on benefits, a fall in the tax take and lesser income to buy the products and services that help to make a healthy economy. The outcome of these policies and the sale of assets will come back to bite us once the capital from the sale has been exhausted and the loss of income and tax revenues is felt. Beware the day when our power and wealth is shown to be all smoke and mirrors.
Sue Allen-Shepherd
Tiptree, Essex
• We should be mortified that the UK ranks at the bottom of teenage literacy league tables among 23 developed nations. Our economic success hinges on a workforce with advanced skills, yet we are failing to develop basic literacy skills among young people. Public libraries provide everyone with equal opportunities to develop a love of reading, access books and develop vital literacy skills. Local economies receive £5 for £1 invested in library services. Yet since 2010, more than 340 libraries have closed and a quarter of librarians have lost their jobs. Addressing the UK’s literacy and skills crisis is critical in order to deliver economic growth and provide greater equality of opportunities and improved life chances for all. We call on the chancellor in the autumn statement to provide local authorities with emergency relief funding for public libraries on a needs-assessed basis as a matter of urgency.
John Bird Crossbench, House of Lords, Jeremy Beecham Labour, Nicholas Trench Crossbench, Sheila Hollins Crossbench, Jenny Jones Green, Frank Judd Labour, Kath Pinnock Lib Dem, Graham Tope Lib Dem
• I read with interest Patrick Collinson’s article on stamp duty (Money, 19 November). While I can understand the sentiment of why we should not be concerned about stamp duty as it only really affects those with properties worth over £1m, one needs to understand that such high rates are providing a huge disincentive to buy at the top end of the market. Yes, this is leading to price falls at the higher end of the London market but the falls are severely curtailed by the fact that there is a lack of incentive to sell.
To say this will not affect the lower end of the market is shortsighted. If the person who is fortunate enough to be able to trade up from a £2m house to a £5m cannot bring themselves to pay stamp duty, their £2m house will not be available for the person trading up from a £1m house and so on.
Contrary to your article, I would urge Philip Hammond to review the current rates. If there is a desire to keep prices at the top end of the market subdued, alternatives should be investigated. Abolition of capital gains tax relief above a gain of say £250,000 or a mansion tax would seem to be ways of curtailing market growth while producing an incentive to sell rather than simply a disincentive to buy.
Andrew Symington
Managing director, Symington Elvery
• Am I the only one to notice that the fiscal measures supposedly aimed at “Jams” (Easing austerity: Options for Hammond, 21 November) – air passenger duty cut, freeze on fuel duty, increased personal tax allowance, increased Isa limits – in fact benefit the better off as much if not more? The only measure mentioned that seems to be targeted at the low paid, increasing the national insurance threshold, is also the only one that has a caveat: “would cost the Treasury billions”.
Chris George
Seaford, East Sussex
• For the autumn statement and beyond I would like to see a clear emphasis on the four Hs: Heathrow, Hinkley, HS2 and highways. Recent government announcements in these areas have been encouraging for the construction industry, and we need to build on this momentum to make sure we get spades in the ground as quickly as possible.
Public sector infrastructure investment not only boosts growth and productivity, it also helps the fifth H: housing. There are significant opportunities from HS2, Heathrow and highways to stimulate the level of house building the country needs in areas that would benefit the most from further development. But the private property sector is currently suffering from a lack of confidence, rather than liquidity. The biggest confidence boost that UK plc could receive is the certainty that these projects are going ahead, now. If government gets started on infrastructure, housing will surely follow.
Mark Naysmith 
UK managing director, WSP
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
While contactless payment terminals have become ubiquitous in retail outlets, Barclays is set to trial contactless ATMs in a number of its branches.
The bank will unveil 100 contactless machines at 25 branches across “the north”, which will allow customers to withdraw up to £100 without putting their card into the machine, or by using their smartphone instead. The exact locations of the machines have not yet been released, but the bank said they would be rolled out to 180 branches across the UK if the project was a success.
ATM users will simply tap their contactless card against the machine’s reader before inputting their pin as normal. Barclays mobile app customers who have one of the latest Android mobile phones with NFC (near-field communication) won’t even need their card – once they open the app and select cash withdrawal they simply tap the phone on the card reader, input their card’s pin either on the ATM or the phone handset, and out pops the money.
Customers with iPhones won’t be able to use the scheme because Apple limits the use of its contactless technology to its own Apple Pay system.
Barclays suggested the facility was more secure than inserting a bank card, as it avoided the risk of having the card’s details hijacked by a skimming machine. The user also cannot walk off and leave their card in the slot.
Those taking out sums greater than £100 will still have to put their card in the machine.
Barclays is not the first bank to allow customers to make cardless withdrawals. Royal Bank of Scotland introduced its Get Cash facility four years ago, designed to help customers in an emergency. It allowed up to £130 to be taken out of an ATM by messaging the user a code via their smartphone which was to be typed into the terminal. The service was suspended for a short period in 2012 after it was targeted by fraudsters.
Security experts have warned that users of the mobile app are probably better off inputting the card’s pin number on the ATM rather than mobile handset. “There could be malware on your phone which is recording the pin as it’s typed in – that would be a new risk,” said Steven Murdoch of University College London. “The malware might also be able to copy your credentials from one phone to another, allowing the other handset to make a withdrawal.”
Last year, more than 90,000 UK bank accounts were defrauded through the use of counterfeit cards, and a further 152,727 because of lost or stolen cards, according to Financial Fraud Action UK.
Ashok Vaswani, chief executive of Barclays UK, said: “Our customers now expect to be able to use their smartphone to make their everyday purchases. We want taking out cash to be just as easy. With Contactless Cash, customers can quickly and securely take out money with just a tap of their smartphone – a first for the UK.”
• This article was amended on 14 December 2016 to make clear that the suspension of the Royal Bank of Scotland’s Get Cash facility in 2012 was temporary.
Are you struggling to keep on top of your small business’s finances? Perhaps you’re feeling overwhelmed by the array of technology solutions on offer. Or maybe you’re interested in growth but are bogged down by rising business costs.
Good cashflow is the lifeblood of any successful business, but with 53% of small firms owed an estimated £255bn, managing the flow of money can be a juggling act. Many entrepreneurs will also not have the resources to hire professional help, but will add bookkeeper to their ever burgeoning list of tasks.
Technology can help – from accountancy software and money management apps, to smart meters and mobile payment tools. But how do you know which to invest time and money in?
If you are struggling with questions of cash management, such as how to automate payments to suppliers or chase late payers, how to make efficiencies in your business to cut costs or budget better, and how to boost revenue while on the move, join us from 1-2pm on Tuesday 29 November when our panel of experts will be available to take your questions.
Taking part is simple: just register to comment. Once you have signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread below this article. Alternatively, tweet @GdnSmallBiz with your questions, or email them to smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com and we will put them to the panel on the day. Comments are open and we welcome questions in advance.
Erik Fairbairn is a serial entrepreneur and founder of POD Point, which was named one of the fastest-growing tech companies in the UK by the Sunday Times and now turns over £6.5m a year.
Charlie Carne is an entrepreneurial chartered accountant who is used to running his business on the move. He has found technology invaluable when it comes to having a real-time view of his and his clients’ finances.
Paul Swift works as a sustainability consultant at the Carbon Trust, assisting organisations to understand the business case of energy-saving opportunities. He recently appeared as the Energy Doctor, working with Smart Energy GB to discuss energy consumption with small businesses in Manchester.
Ali Golds is an experienced business coach, supporting female founders to develop their businesses and achieve success. She is also a published author: her book How to Be Your Own Boss As a Single Mum reached number eight in the Amazon download chart on its release.
Philip King is the chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Credit Management and author of the organisation’s collection of managing cashflow guides, written in partnership with the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS).
Paul Haydock is the co-founder of DueCourse, a technology solution that allows entrepreneurs to release money tied up in unpaid invoices. The business expects to release £16.5m of advances by the end of 2016.
Jessica Zoo is the co-founder and creative director of Zoo Riot, a London-based fitness class company that also provides party activities and team-building workshops.
Sean Drake is the founder of The Wealth Project Holdings PLC, a sustainable investment business that supports and invests in entrepreneurs through education, technology and capital.
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, has been given a boost ahead of his maiden autumn statement by a Guardian analysis showing the economy continues to confound gloomy forecasts for a post-referendum slump.
A bumper month for retail sales, a steady housing market, broad-based business growth and a drop in the jobless rate have all boosted hopes for a strong finish to the year for the UK economy.
Hammond is being warned, however, to look past the signs of early resilience to a challenging 2017 when Brexit talks begin in earnest, rising inflation starts to bite and the world gets to grips with Donald Trump taking over the US presidency.
For now, however, the pound has steadied on financial markets and the economic signals point to resilient consumers. That will provide some solace to Hammond as he prepares to deliver his speech on Wednesday, when he will be forced to concede that the longer-term outlook for the economy is gloomier than at his predecessor George Osborne’s budget just eight months ago.
To track the impact of the Brexit vote on a monthly basis, the Guardian has chosen eight economic indicators, as well as the value of the pound and the performance of the FTSE.
The dashboard for November shows a better than expected performance in five of the eight categories. Two were worse than expected and inflation was lower than economists forecast, defying expectations for it to rise swiftly on the back of the weak pound.
Five months on from the vote to leave the EU, the latest batch of figures show unemployment dropped to an 11-year low, retail sales rose sharply, house prices picked up, business activity continued to grow and the public finances improved. But Britain’s trade gap with the rest of the world widened and wage growth stalled.
The pound has recovered some ground in the latest month, as investor focus shifts away from the UK currency and instead to the euro after Trump’s victory raised fears of similar anti-establishment gains in a host of elections in the eurozone over coming months. Analysts also said the pound may have found a floor, having dropped 10% against the euro and 16% against the dollar since the referendum.
On stock markets, the FTSE 100 leading index is off a record high hit in October but is still 8% above it’s pre-referendum level. The more domestically focused FTSE 250 is 2% higher than it was on the day of the referendum.
But behind the upbeat headlines there are growing signs the weak pound will push up prices and squeeze household budgets in the months ahead. Wage growth is expected to slow and economists warn that with employment growth already waning, pay will struggle to keep up with living costs next year.
Andrew Sentance, a former Bank of England policymaker, said price pressures were clearly rising.
“It is clear from the measure of input prices paid by manufacturers that a wave of inflation is coming through the pipeline driven by a weaker pound. We should therefore still expect to see inflation at around 3% or just below by the end of next year.
“That will squeeze real consumer spending growth, adding to the slowdown generated by uncertainty affecting investment plans.”
Household worries about inflation are already rising after high-profile pricing tussles between supermarkets and big brands such as Typhoo and Walkers crisps.
Eight out of 10 consumers said they were worried that changes in inflation over the next 12 months would affect the cost of everyday goods, according to one YouGov poll for Barclaycard. As a result, people’s overall confidence in the UK economy and in their own finances waned.
For businesses, the pound’s weakness also weighed heavy. Despite the boost to competitiveness for those selling their goods overseas, exports fell in the latest trade figures while imports rose.
At the same time, the weak pound ramped up the cost of importing raw materials and manufacturers started to pass some of that on to their clients. Putting some solid figures behind the rows over Marmite and other foods, the latest official data on manufacturers’ costs showed they soared 12.2% in the year to October, the biggest increase for five years. So-called “factory gate” prices charged to their customers were up 2.1% on the year, the biggest rise for more than four years.
That was echoed in the services sector – encompassing shops, hotels, bars and banks – where businesses faced the biggest one-month jump in costs for 20 years in October, according to the closely watched Markit/CIPS services PMI report.
Business investment is expected to suffer as company bosses fret about those rising costs, as well as political uncertainty.
Economists warn that the nervous climate will translate into firms putting off big spending and hiring decisions. The Bank of England predicts a slowdown in business investment will weigh on overall economic growth next year.
Writing in the Guardian, a former member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC), David Blanchflower, said Hammond should heed those longer-term forecasts.
“The UK economy is slowing, there is no doubt about it. The incoming data so far though are mixed as it is early days post the Brexit vote,” said Blanchflower, professor of economics at Dartmouth College in the US.
“GDP growth isn’t set to slow sharply in the fourth quarter of 2016 but 2017 is likely a different matter.”
He urged the chancellor to respond with big initiatives to shore up growth, or risk further antagonising voters.
“It is time to condemn austerity into the dustbin of history. It is the unnecessary hang-up with debts and deficits that has got us into this fine populist mess in the first place.”
There was little hint of such a change of direction in a Treasury reaction to public finance data on Tuesday showing the deficit was smaller than expected in October.
A Treasury spokesman said: “As the chancellor has made clear, the government is committed to fiscal discipline and will return the budget to balance over a sensible period of time, in a way that allows space to support the economy as needed.”
Headline growth figures have defied gloomy forecasts made during a bitter referendum campaign and in the wake of the Brexit vote, when many economists predicted a recession. 
An update on GDP from the Office for National Statistics later this week is expected to confirm its previous estimate that the economy grew a relatively strong 0.5% in the three months following the Brexit vote, down only slightly from 0.7% growth in the run-up to the referendum. But analysts believe details released with this latest GDP report will show business investment slowed following the Brexit vote.
Chris Hare, economist at Investec commented: “When economic uncertainty rises, business investment tends to be the first casualty – in such episodes businesses, tend to revert to ‘wait-and-see’ mode and postpone their capital spending plans.”
The delivery firm CitySprint is to become the latest British business embroiled in a legal dispute over the gig economy when it faces demands at an employment tribunal to treat its freelance couriers as workers.
Mags Dewhurst, who has made deliveries for the firm for more than two years, will argue on Tuesday that she should be given worker status, and the rights that come with it, such as holiday pay and the national minimum wage.
The case is the first of four against different courier firms that will be heard by the same judge. The other cases, against Addison Lee, eCourier and Excel, will be heard next year.
Jason Moyer-Lee, the head of the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB), which is backing the riders, said the cyclists worked for one company at a time and were obliged to take work they were given throughout the day.
He said independent contractors were able to send others to do their work, but that was not possible for Dewhurst and the other riders.
“Even though the courier firms say Mags can send a substitute, she can’t really, as there are restrictions that prevent that,” he said.
Moyer-Lee said the point of the cases was to test the status of the workers. CitySprint, which has 3,500 self-employed couriers in the UK, could face further claims if the tribunal finds against it.
Dewhurst said: “I’m taking this action because I have personal experience of [earning], and know many courier friends earn, below the national minimum wage. Our lives tend to be thrown into financial chaos when we want to go on holiday.
“Worker status will finally redress some of the balance between couriers and courier companies, and transform our lives for the better. These benefits have for too long been withheld by courier companies and only serve to make it easier for them to exploit their workforce. It is time to afford couriers some basic employment rights.”
An employment tribunal last month found in favour of drivers for the taxi-hailing firm Uber, who argued that they should be classed as workers. Uber has appealed against the ruling.
Moyer-Lee said: “We were confident before the Uber case. [Dewhurst] fits all the criteria [of a worker] – so does pretty much any other pushbike courier I’ve met.”
Matt Gingell, an employment law partner at Gannons Solicitors, said: “The employment tribunal may well be influenced by the Uber decision. But that judgment is not binding and the facts will be different in these cases.”
A spokesman for CitySprint said: “We can confirm we have received notification of a tribunal claim. As you will appreciate, due to the legal process we cannot comment any further on this at this stage.”
The tribunal is expected to start hearing evidence from witnesses on Wednesday.
• This article was amended on 22 November 2016 to correct employment terminology.
We are a party of 10 who have booked a ski holiday at the end of February. At the time of booking we were told that free drinks were included with evening meals at our hotel and this was key when choosing the best deal.
However, we have now been informed that the hotel has withdrawn the offer. It has offered around £35 compensation per person.
Is it allowed to change a package like this after selling it to us? NJ, by email
Interesting question – the package travel regulations state that if there are significant alterations to “essential” terms of your package, the travel organiser must allow you to withdraw from the contract without penalty, or to accept the alterations.
In general, “essential” terms include price, the precise type and nature of the accommodation, and the place and time of departure/destination.
Given that you said the free drinks were a key consideration, and not having them could have a big effect on the price of your holiday, you could argue it was an “essential” term.
If you don’t consider the £35 to be sufficient you are within your rights to cancel without penalty. Ski companies are going to face a tough time this winter given the plunge in the pound, so they will likely be keen to negotiate an outcome that retains your booking – this is probably the way to go.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Commuting is the worst part of most people’s day. That was certainly the case for me when I was travelling 45 minutes, there and back, across London each day. On packed trains I would close my eyes and wish I was somewhere else. But then I swapped that for a four-and-a-half-hour round trip between Stafford and the capital, and I suddenly began to love my commute.
As someone who travels more than 90 miles to work I’m part of a rising phenomenon of super-commuters. The number of workers who commute daily for two hours or more has increased by a third in five years. As workers are priced out of inner cities, London in particular, those looking for the security of owning their home have had to look further afield.
My journey from Stafford to London involves a direct train with no stops, which, when it runs on time, takes about an hour and 20 minutes. Add in a 20-minute stroll to the station, 15 minutes on the tube and the door to door is roughly two and a half hours.
On the underground I used to hate all the useless hours squashed up against a Perspex window, but my new commute has been a great pleasure, and a great help with my job too. A big part of my work is writing, but to be a good writer you need to read. Commuting provides the time to get through books, reviews and articles; I’ve fallen back in love with great authors as a result. I can get through two books a week and draft two articles if I spend an hour in the morning and evening. It’s time that lends itself to thinking.
More than anything else, I cherish the solitude commuting gives me. When my wife and I lost a child a couple of years ago I used the hours between the city and home to think it all out of me (forgive the inelegant phrasing). I’d get lost in my own head, safe in the knowledge that arrival at my destination would snap me out of it. Time became space and I filled it with the thing I didn’t have room for anywhere else. I see this in other people who catch the train, that long exhale of the day. It is an opportunity to shed the day’s stress before getting home.
We super-commuters rarely talk to each other, much the same as those with short commutes. But because of the extra time and space we can indulge knowing nods and British politeness. I must admit to having an unnatural attachment to a particular seat – I have come to view it as an extension of my own sitting room. This is irrational of course, but after three years of sitting in it I feel my claim must carry weight.
When people learn that going from Stafford to London doesn’t take much longer than going from Romford to Victoria they are usually surprised. But the price – £1,100 a month – always draws a groan or a wince. On renewing my season ticket I always take a moment longer than necessary to stare at the cash register displaying the cost. Yet I can’t complain, I’m lucky to be able to commute. Moving out of London after 10 years allowed me to get on to the housing ladder. The money I would have spent on a shoebox flat now buys me time to reflect.
There are some drawbacks. When you’re delayed, for instance, you’re often very late. With no alternative routes you have to just sit through it (luckily you can usually get a seat on longer commutes. In three years there’s been only one journey where I’ve had to stand). Going out after work for drinks has become a rare occurrence as I’ve got a toddler at home, but when I do go out, I have to leave early, which puts a dampener on things. If I miss the 10pm train, I’m sofa surfing. But for my needs, super-commuting works: the time it gives me makes it worthwhile, and the family are happier living in a house than a flat.
The Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw said he made an international reputation thinking once or twice a week compared with most people who think once or twice a year. I can’t imagine he commuted much but if he were alive today I’m sure he’d do some of that pondering to and from the office. A longer commute hasn’t robbed me of time, it has given some back to me. I’m no Bernard Shaw but I’m savvy enough to know that’s a good thing.
Calls have been made for the Treasury to unpick a controversial change to student loans from George Osborne’s final autumn statement, which critics including MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis have called a mis-selling of loans to thousands of young people.
Lewis has led the charge to oppose the changes made in 2015: a five-year freeze on the £21,000 income threshold at which borrowings must be paid back, despite a pledge when the scheme was launched that the £21,000 figure would be raised each year in line with average earnings.
The consumer expert said he hoped the Labour frontbench would take up the fight if the autumn statement did not reverse the freeze.
“It is absolutely disgraceful, because change going forward is a change of policy but change going backwards is about honesty,” he said. “This is about honesty.”
The change, vociferously opposed by Lewis and the Labour MP Wes Streeting, a former NUS president, will mean that on average a former student will pay £306 a year more in 2020-21 compared with 2016-17.
Lewis told the Guardian he had lobbied both the Treasury and the universities minister Jo Johnson to reverse the freeze in this week’s autumn statement.
“I have tried everything – hiring lawyers, speaking to senior people in No 10, putting in submissions to the autumn statement, debates in parliament, but this is totemic to me,” he said.
“This is about how young people can trust politics, when people can retroactively change a contract, if they are lied to in contract? It is an absolute disgrace.”
Lewis said he had hoped to see more vocal opposition to the freeze from the Labour party frontbench.
“I feel slightly disappointed that I’ve been the official opposition on this,” he said. “I hope they’ll join the fight, and put aside what I think has been the idea, that the whole system is the problem, and that they can now play the current ball rather than the future game.”
On Monday night Streeting tabled two amendments to the higher education and research bill, firstly to bar the government from making retroactive changes to student finance without it being looked at by an independent panel, and secondly to bring student loans under regulation of the Financial Conduct Authority.
Though Tory MPs defeated the amendments in the Commons, Streeting said he hoped Labour peers will take up the amendments in the House of Lords.
“If any commercial bank or pay day lender behaved like this there would be outrage and the FCA would be stepping in,” Streeting said.
“But these aren’t regulated by the FCA and so George Osborne decided this was a nice little money saver and drove a coach and horses through the expectations students and graduates had about what they would be paying at what point.”
The Labour MP said he hoped that a new regime at the Treasury would be convinced to look again.
“There’s a serious issue about trust here: if students are being promised the threshold will go up, and it doesn’t, what’s to stop current or future students finding suddenly the interest rates goes up, or debts aren’t written off after 30 years, like they were promised?” he said.
The replica designer furniture market has become a huge industry, but a rushed change to the law has plunged it into chaos
Train companies will only have to provide slow free Wi-Fi for customers despite a government pledge to introduce “fast, cheap internet connections” across the rail network.
Before the general election, the government announced that all train operators bidding on future franchises and direct contracts in England and Wales would have to include free Wi-Fi as part of their pitches.
The Department for Transport (DfT) even found almost £50m of funding for several operators, including Southeastern and Arriva Trains Wales, to make sure free Wi-Fi could be introduced on some lines by 2017.
However, Matt Hancock, the digital policy minister, revealed in a parliamentary debate that the minimum speed required on those bids was 1 megabit per second (Mbps) per passenger, “which allows for basic web browsing, basic email and social media activity”.
This speed means a video would take hours to download and even just opening an email with an attachment would be a lengthy process. This is about a decade out of date for business travellers, even though the government wanted free Wi-Fi to enable commuters “to keep up with work”.
Hancock said this minimum requirement would be increased by 25% a year and franchise bidders were already exceeding this threshold. For example, Abellio will provide up to 100 Mbps per passenger by 2019 on the East Anglia franchise.
But a senior rail executive told the Guardian train operators could not be relied upon to guarantee fast broadband given their track records.
He said: “Wi-Fi on trains is becoming an essential requirement for any business person travelling, but train companies in this country have been a bit slow on getting on board with better Wi-Fi.”
David Sidebottom, the passenger director at the watchdog Transport Focus, said: “Wi-Fi speed and connectivity can be patchy. Some operators charge for connections while on-board, while several do not offer any Wi-Fi at all.
“We know that passengers now expect reliable, free access to Wi-Fi on trains – it was in their top 10 priorities for improvement – so we urge future franchises to ensure they have the capability to deliver this.”
Louise Haigh, Labour’s digital economy spokeswoman, has pushed the government to commit to fast rail broadband through legislation. She is considering an amendment to the digital economy bill, which will return to the floor of the Commons next week.
Haigh said: “Providing good, free Wi-Fi on public transport is not just a better service for passengers but improves productivity and supports business as well.
“A third of the major rail franchises still do not provide free Wi-Fi, and the standard specification is only 1 Mbps per passenger, which will be very slow, even for some basic activity such as downloading an email with an attachment.
“Given the huge profits made by the private train companies, the government should be pushing them to go further, faster.”
Haigh is also preparing an amendment to the bus services bill, which would force bus operators to provide free Wi-Fi. “What goes for trains should go for the rest of our public transport network too,” she said.
A DfT spokesman said: “We are investing record amounts in our railways to improve journeys and expect that 90% of all trains will have access to Wi-Fi by the end of 2018, with virtually 100% by 2020.”
The cynics were right: the excitement generated by Theresa May’s early enthusiasm for reforming the way companies are run turns out to have been misplaced. Her promises of employees and consumers on boards are dust. Her rethink of governance that might spell the end of the short-termist interpretation of shareholder value, so destructive to sustainable prosperity, is consigned to a distant green paper. Reform of corporate governance may reappear, one day, but it doesn’t seem likely this side of Brexit. That is a serious misjudgment. Mrs May has not only betrayed a promise that she made in July and again in October, she has missed a big chance to build stronger companies by boardroom diversity.
What makes the prime minister’s U-turn even more disappointing is that this is not some adventure in alternative economic management, but a modification of the UK system of corporate governance that would bring it into line with the majority of EU member states, including all the larger economies except Italy. Almost the only European countries as dismissive of a workers’ voice as the UK are the new Baltic democracies. Even Romania allows employee representatives to attend board meetings on some occasions.
The employee-director argument goes to the heart of what, and who, a company is run for. Most countries in Europe treat stakeholder interest with respect. It is nearly 40 years since Lord Bullock’s report into industrial democracy, conducted at a time of aggressive confrontation. He concluded that regarding the company as only the property of shareholders was out of touch with the reality of the company as “a complex social and economic entity, subject to a variety of internal and external pressures”, controlled by professional management. Yet still shareholders rule. Even when Labour overhauled corporate governance in 2006, it was investor interest that came first and last. Then the financial crash in 2008 illustrated two important things: first, what catastrophic decisions were taken in some bank boardrooms, and then how industrial relations had been transformed.
Pay freezes and cuts in hours largely took the place of the kind of devastating jobs shakeout that led to more than three million unemployed after the 1981 recession. But where there was restraint on the shop floor, at the top there were grotesquely inflated salaries and bonuses, accompanied by a revolution among shareholders when the proportion of British-based shareholders fell sharply while the number of overseas investors rose. As a TUC survey of fund managers found, overseas investors are significantly less interested in how a company is run in terms of its workers, or its environmental impact, or executive pay. Nor is there any control over shareholders or fund managers who are interested in what profits they can make from share trades rather than the long-term prosperity of the company. These “ownerless corporations” have no practical obligation to pay attention to the interests of their workforce at all.
Putting workers on company boards would not end all these problems. But, as Vince Cable argued when he was business secretary in the coalition, they would be a good start. It is hard to understand why the CBI is so resistant. Its best arguments, as it welcomed its triumph, concerned confidentiality (although why employee directors should be more inclined to breach it than other directors isn’t clear) and a claim that international companies would struggle to ensure representation, a feeble argument when shareholders can, and often do, hide in opaque ownership structures.
Europe’s strongest economies prosper under diverse arrangements for workers’ representation. The arguments in its favour in terms of resilient, productive companies are unambiguous. Yet what looked as if it might develop into an important strand of Theresa May’s version of Conservatism has been abandoned as soon as the CBI said “boo”.
About 31,000 highly qualified British resident workers have left the north each year in the past decade with only 23,500 a year moving in the opposite direction.The Tory architect of George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse” strategy and leaders of Britain’s largest northern cities are demanding that the government acts to reverse a major brain drain to the south of England.
Theresa May’s government is being urged by the political leaders of Leeds,Manchester, Newcastle and Liverpool – who describe themselves as a “council of the north” – to urgently prioritise the east-west rail links between the major northern cities to boost the future of the region.
We spoke to people who left the north of England to work in the south about their experiences.
Louise, 27, associate in fund management
Moved to Kennington, south London, from Cumbria
I moved due to a lack of job opportunities – other than Edinburgh, there wasn’t really anywhere else I could work outside of London.
Cumbria offers cheaper housing and a better standard of living. In London, I feel that my generation are infantilised compared with my northern friends who drive to work, own their own homes and dogs, and have actual hobbies. I see my London friends stumbling out of bars on a Thursday, Friday and Saturday night, queueing up for brunch the next day, going for a walk around a park, and finishing the day off with an £18 roast in a pub that normally runs out of beef and lamb by 6pm as everyone is doing the same thing, so they end up with a nut roast. They sleep off the malbec, then it’s Monday morning and it all starts again, with a squeeze on to the Northern line and an overcrowded gym class in the evening.
But I don’t regret the move. I have been able to gain a lot of experience working in London, and enjoy all that London has to offer in the way of arts, music and most importantly food. However, after five years I am starting to get frustrated at the overcrowding. In the Lakes you can get truly lost, enjoy the peace and scenery, and realise that there is more to life than working, drinking and spending.
I had a staff job in Sheffield, but I was offered work in London and, while I’d always resisted the idea of living in the “Big Smoke”, I feel as if there is more opportunity here. I also got frustrated with the lack of investment in Sheffield city centre, and the rows that continue over plans for new buildings. Local people fight to preserve old buildings that are rundown but seen to be historic. This is to the detriment of development. Transport is really bad, too – trains to Manchester and York are slow and expensive.
I love Yorkshire and the north, and my family are there. However, I think people get set in their jobs and ways, so workplaces stagnate. I think there is so much more to do in London, and it is full of vibrancy and ideas. In the north, councils are bogged down with petty domestic arguments. People are too inward-looking, and bitter that the south attracts more investment – without doing anything to entice people to stay. I also think meeting a partner will be easier in London, as there is just a greater volume of people to choose from!
I have no regrets about moving and wish I’d done it a lot sooner, although I’m glad I saved money and established a career before I came.
Name withheld, 44, transport worker
Moved from Manchester to London
I was made redundant from my job in Manchester, and spent a year and a half trying to find something in a similar field, but there was nothing. Eventually, opportunities started to appear but only in London, so I decided to take one.
Initially, the move was a disaster, and within weeks I wanted to go back. I found myself completely unsuited to the job, suffered from depression and was bullied out of the job. I was eventually diagnosed with social anxiety, something I had suffered with since I was a teenager. I am now incredibly grateful for the experience as I have grown immeasurably, but I would never have expected things to work out this way.
Now, I am settled in my life in London. I have a good job and a great group of friends. People come to me for advice on how to give presentations, whereas before I would stutter and stumble my way through them. Now, I can’t see myself leaving London. Once, I would have said the same about Manchester, but the truth is I was stagnating there. The pace of life is faster here, money doesn’t go as far and it’s very crowded, but there is so much more scope to do things in the city. I wouldn’t change it for anything now.
The only opportunity for work in the field that I love is in the south, either near London or in Cambridge. I would have preferred to stay put if the same opportunities were available in the north, as I was otherwise very happy in Sheffield. But I don’t regret making the move. I’m pursuing the career that I’ve always wanted and the opportunity that the south affords is much greater than the north. I don’t feel that the industry in which I work – hardware 3D graphics – is particularly special in this regard. There are many industries where the opportunity and reward is significantly higher in this part of the country. Technical industries, in particular, naturally gravitate here, and as a result I’m not surprised to learn of the impact, especially where it concerns skilled graduates.
James Adair, 26, film director
Moved to London from Northumberland via Leeds
I joined a small film production startup with two friends after graduating in Leeds. We worked successfully in sports and corporate films for a few years, but the budgets were often tight and we lived hand to mouth. Another issue was the creative opportunities within the type of work we were offered; they felt very safe.
We were then signed to one of London’s biggest film production companies, and became “directors” overnight. But we started to realise clients were getting turned off by the geographical distance of Leeds and the fact that we couldn’t be in a meeting at the drop of a hat, so we discussed moving to London. For me, I think the main point of contention was the surprise that, in 2014, with our hyperconnected society, London remained the beating heart of all things film-related.
I moved to the capital with £1,500 in my bank account, no projected work and a three-year contract on a rented flat. It really was sink or swim.
I don’t subscribe to the rhetoric that Manchester is the “London of the north” for moving image. Beyond TV, it remains as irrelevant as everywhere else, unfortunately – and for us, that was no good. But I do regret giving up on the north. It bothers me that I drew from the state in the north, to then support the London economy.
London, however, has completely changed our lives for the better, so it’s hard to remain bitter. We’re so grateful for how our careers have panned out after moving south.
Only a third of plastic packaging used in consumer products is recycled each year, with almost two-thirds sent to landfill or incinerated, according to new research.
Of the 1.5m tonnes of recyclable plastic waste used by consumers in Britain in 2015 only 500,000 tonnes was recycled, according to the figures compiled by Co-op from the Recoup UK Household Plastics Collection survey.
This figure means that the recycling of plastic is considerably below the national average for recycling; currently 45% of recyclable goods are recycled each year.
Recycling groups said the problem was largely caused by consumer uncertainty about what items could be recycled, as well as the lack of provision of recycling services by local authorities.
“Most people recognise a plastic bottle as something you can recycle,” said Steve Morgan, technical manager at plastic recycling charity Recoup. “The recycling rate is about 60% for plastic bottles but when you start talking about other products, plastic pots and tray – a yoghurt pot, a margarine tub – the recycling rate is far lower.”
Consumers were most diligent with recycling plastic bottles, with people recycling 7.5b out of 13b (57%) plastic bottles used by UK households each year. However, only about 30% of all plastic pots, tubs and trays were recycled.
The worst offender was plastic film products, which include carrier bags, pasta and rice bags, and the film on ready meals, only about 3% of which were believed to be recycled in 2015. This is largely due to the fact that just 80 Local Authorities around the country (20%) provide a recycling service for the collection of these materials.
Iain Ferguson, the environment manager at Co-op, said: “It is shocking that such a small percentage of plastic packaging is being recycled, especially materials that are already easy to recycle like plastic bottles. We are concerned that so much still goes to landfill every year. We need to stop thinking about this plastic as a waste and start to use it as a resource.”
Recycled plastic products can be turned into a range of other things including plastic furniture, football shirts, sleeping bags, bumpers for cars and building products.
“There’s plenty more material that the waster and resources industry want to get hold of. This material is increasingly being used as a resource, it can be recycled into very high-end products,” said Morgan.
There has been a considerable increase in the amount of plastics recycled across the EU in the past decade. Between 2006-2014 there was a 64% increase in recycling of plastics and a reduction in landfill caused by plastics of 38%.
“The general message is that the amount of plastic packaging in landfill has decreased, it’s a huge success story of the last 20 years,” said Morgan. “But so much more can be done. There’s plenty of material that comes through the household that ends in the bin.”
The boss of a payday loans company hired computer hackers to try to sabotage a consumer rights website after it had carried customers’ complaints about his business.
James Frazer-Mann, 35, was tracked down by the FBI after he paid American hackers to launch an attack on the Consumer Action Group (CAG) website.
Cardiff crown court heard Frazer-Mann, the owner of Elite Loans, also paid hackers to target websites of rival payday loan companies.
Frazer-Mann, of Barry, South Wales, was sentenced to four months in prison, suspended for 12 months. He was also ordered to carry out 180 hours of unpaid work and told to pay £530 in costs after admitting five charges of commissioning hacks.
The court was told that Frazer-Mann contacted hackers after being criticised on the CAG website, a UK forum for the discussion of consumer rights.
One comment relating to Frazer-Mann’s firm read: “These companies are preying on people already in a vulnerable position and making life harder, they should be shut down!!!”
Frazer-Mann tracked down hackers on an online forum about hacking and paid one to try to take the website down, though it did not work.
He also paid £2,000 to hackers to mount cyber-attacks against the websites of competitors. They used a tactic called distributed denial of service, which typically involves flooding the target with superfluous requests in an attempt to overload their systems.
James Davies, for the prosecution, said: “The effects of such attacks are significant as the companies are so reliant on their websites to generate business.”
The court was told Frazer-Mann used the Liberty Reserve payment system, based in Costa Rica, which allowed users to transfer money by giving a name, date of birth and email address.
It was shut down by the US government in May 2013 amid fears it was being used by criminals. During its investigation into the system, the FBI came across Frazer-Mann’s dealings with hackers and contacted officers in the UK.
The businessman’s home was raided and his computer equipment seized.
Davies said: “He claims his company had initially been targeted by other companies. It’s an area of business which is highly competitive and some use unethical practices. He said he lost £1,000 a day when his website was targeted.”
Ben Douglas-Jones, for the defence, told the court the consumer site had detailed the married businessman’s personal information, and encouraged users to contact him.
Douglas-Jones added: “There’s a low risk of him committing further offences of this nature. He’s now working as a carpet cleaner.” The court heard Elite Loans has since stopped operating.
The recorder of Cardiff, Judge Eleri Rees, told the businessman: “Over a period of two years you resorted through revenge to try and disrupt websites. You were prepared to spend quite considerable amounts of money to achieve this end.”
After the hearing, CAG’s founder, Marc Gander, said: “This shows the lengths these payday loans companies will go to in a bid to silence their critics. He was upset and contacted a hacker in the US. But it was a very stupid thing to do and it failed to work.”
Gander said his free website had 350,000 members who share consumer advice.
The chancellor is set to restrict the tax-free benefits offered by “salary sacrifice” schemes, where employees agree to reduced cash pay in return for certain benefits.
According to tax experts, Philip Hammond is considering raiding employee benefits such as health checks, parking and gyms in Wednesday’s autumn statement, as he seeks to offset his possible spending plans.
Cars could be heavily affected because nearly half of company cars are provided by businesses that offer a cash alternative — although it is possible that super-low-emissions electric/hybrid cars could be exempted to encourage take-up.
A government consultation has already said that pension contributions, childcare and cycle-to-work schemes will not be affected by the changes.
Salary sacrifice schemes are a growing cost for the exchequer, and have grown by a third in the five years to 2014-15, particularly among those providing cars, health screening, mobile phones, televisions, computers and even white goods.
Employers benefit from salary sacrifice arrangements because it lowers the amount they must pay in national insurance contributions. Employees reduce their income tax bill.
Mark Groom, an employment tax partner at Deloitte, said it was unclear, even to the Treasury, what the value of such a move would be, but the sums involved were “relatively small beer”.
“The proposals will in fact go further than salary sacrifice, and are intended to apply wherever a benefit has been obtained instead of cash in any circumstances including, for example, cash alternatives, flexible benefit allowances and simple trading-up of benefits,” Groom said.
He added that the benefits currently afforded a favourable tax treatment would be most impacted. “Typically these include death-in-service benefits, health screens, car parking, workplace gyms, work-related training, mobile phones and low-CO cars,” he said.
The most affected perks are likely to be those involving benefits such as gym membership that are currently exempt from tax. If a company offered gym membership worth £360 a year under a salary sacrifice scheme — or offered it as a perk with a cash alternative — a basic rate taxpayer would pay an extra £72 of tax and the employer would pay just under £50 of extra national insurance contributions.
The changes are unlikely to affect private medical insurance, which is already liable to both tax and employer national insurance contributions (NICs). In a consultation, HMRC said that in most cases the changes would only apply to income tax and employer NICs, because no employee NICs were due on the vast majority of benefits in kind.
Separately, the motoring organisation the AA has called on on the chancellor to cut Insurance Premium Tax (IPT), claiming it has has risen faster than any other form of taxation in recent years.
In November 2015, the rate of IPT on car and all other insurance products went up from 6% to 9.5%, and then another 0.5 points on 1 October 2016, bringing it to 10%.
The AA and other insurance industry experts have expressed concern that the chancellor might add a further 2% to IPT on Wednesday. The AA said this would penalise those “who take responsibility for their belongings and property by insuring them”.
The amount of cash that will be protected for savers in banks and building societies that go bust is likely to be raised to £85,000 because of the slump in the value of the pound since the vote to leave the UK.
The £10,000 rise is required to keep the UK in line with an EU-wide deposit protection limit of €100,000.
Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, said the situation was absurd and causing uncertainty for savers. “Brexit should give the UK the opportunity to set its own level of protection,” said Tyrie. “We should take it.”
The limit was cut to £75,000 in July 2015, when sterling was stronger, to keep the UK banking system in step with the rest of the EU. The measure was introduced after the banking crisis to prevent savers moving their money across borders to chase the highest level of protection, as was the case when Ireland offered more generous insurance during the height of the crisis in October 2008.
In the UK, the savings guarantee is provided by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme (FSCS), which in turn is funded by the financial services industry.
Each country in the EU but not using the euro is obliged to review its limit every five years, but is allowed to make changes in the light of unforeseen events. Following the fall in the pound over the summer, the Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) is consulting on plans to bring the limit back up to £85,000, with effect from 30 January 2017.
“Taking into consideration the developments in financial markets following the UK’s referendum vote to leave the European Union on 23 June 2016, including with respect to the [pound-euro] exchange rate, the PRA considers that a structural shift in the exchange rate has occurred,” the Bank said. “These events were unforeseen when the UK limit was reduced in 2015.”
The Bank of England appears to be indicating that devaluation of sterling is for the long-term. Since the surprise result of the 23 June referendum, sterling has plunged to 30-year lows against the dollar. In terms of euros, the pound was was trading at €1.30 before result of the vote, and now trades at around €1.17.
Savings providers will be given until 30 June 2017 to update their systems and promotional material such as adverts and letters to customers.
Danny Cox, chartered financial planner at the independent financial advisor Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Setting the level of deposit protection for UK savers based on the exchange rate from a foreign currency on a seemingly random date has never made much sense.”
He said the popularity of government-backed National Savings & Investments products showed how important security was to people. “Resetting the FSCS limit back to £85,000 sets a more positive tone for savers,” he added.
The FSCS protects customers of banks, building societies and credit unions that collapse. The queues outside branches of Northern Rock in 2007 forced policymakers to take action on deposit protection. The Labour government moved to guarantee 100% of £35,000 of savings, replacing a tiered system of protection. It was increased to £50,000 during the 2008 banking crisis and £85,000 at the end of 2010.
The plan to increase the protection level back to £85,000 will benefit about 500,000 savers and will mean around 98% of customers are protected. Just under 1m savings accounts hold more than the top limit of £85,000.
“Arguably the UK is obliged to make an early adjustment under the relevant EU directive, on account of the post-referendum adjustment in the exchange rate, but there is little doubt that putting the level of financial protection back to its pre-2015 sterling level of £85,000 serves the UK’s domestic agenda,” said Paul Edmondson, head of financial services at the law firm CMS.
Apple will replace the batteries on its iPhone 6S free of charge after discovering a fault with the 2015 top-end smartphone.
The company has started a free repair programme for iPhone 6S smartphones manufactured between September and October 2015.
Apple said in a support document published on Sunday: “Apple has determined that a very small number of iPhone 6s devices may unexpectedly shut down.
“If your iPhone 6s has any damage such as a cracked screen which impairs the replacement of the battery, that issue will need to be resolved prior to the battery replacement. In some cases, there may be a cost associated with the repair.”
Checking whether your iPhone 6S is eligible for the free repair requires a trip to an Apple store or authorised service centre. Mobile phone network stores are not part of the service programme.
Apple is also offering refunds for those who have already paid to replace their batteries for the same issue.
The smartphone maker recently kicked off a repair programme for the so-called touch disease affecting the iPhone 6 Plus, which starts as a thin grey line on the display and eventually renders the phone’s touchscreen inoperative.
Apple charges £146.44 for affected devices with unbroken screen glass to repair the touchscreen issues.
Theresa May is to suggest further cuts to corporation tax to match those proposed by Donald Trump as she outlines a series of pro-businesses proposals to the Confederation of British Industry (CBI) annual conference on Monday morning.
In her first speech to the organisation as prime minister, May was expected to outline her “aim” for the UK to keep its status as having the lowest corporation tax rate among the G20 group of countries.
In the UK this is currently 20%, and is due to fall to 17% by 2020. However, Trump, the president-elect, has talked of cutting the equivalent US federal tax from 35% to 15%, raising the possibility of further cuts in the UK.
May was also due to commit the UK to a £2bn annual fund for scientific research and development and a review of tax incentives for innovative corporations in an effort to boost the technology industry.
In her first speech to the CBI’s annual conference, May will outline “the first steps in a modern, ambitious industrial strategy” following increasing anger from bosses at her administration’s approach towards big business.
Mounting frustration with No 10 was disclosed last month when Carolyn Fairbairn, the CBI’s director general, publicly accused May of “closing the door” on Britain’s open economy. It followed industry concerns that the new prime minister was less business-friendly than her predecessor, David Cameron.
She was to use the speech in central London to outline elements from this week’s autumn statement, and to say she will “always believe in business” and the benefits it brings.
“In the autumn statement on Wednesday, we will commit to substantial real terms increases in government investment in R&D investing an extra £2bn a year by the end of this parliament to help put post-Brexit Britain at the cutting edge of science and tech,” she was to say.
“And we will also review the support we give innovative firms through the tax system ... because my aim is not simply for the UK to have the lowest corporate tax rate in the G20, but also one that is profoundly pro-innovation.”
The prime minister was also to announce a new industrial strategy challenge fund to back priority technologies, such as robotics and biotechnology.
May will also announce a review of research and development tax incentives to ensure the global competitiveness of the UK as a home for scientists, innovators and tech investors.
She will say: “It is not about propping up failing industries or picking winners but creating the conditions where winners can emerge and grow. It is about backing those winners all the way, to encourage them to invest in the long-term future of Britain, and about delivering jobs and economic growth to every community and corner of the country.
“That is the ambition – and we need your help to put it into practice.”
In other parts of the speech previewed in advance, May was to stress that companies need to do “more to spread those benefits around the country, playing by the same rules as everyone else when it comes to tax and behaviour, and investing in Britain for the long-term”.
She was to say: “We believe in free markets. They are the means by which we spread opportunity and lift people out of poverty. We believe in capitalism – the means by which we drive economic growth, putting people into work to provide for their families. And we believe in business – the entrepreneurs and the innovators who employ millions of people up and down this country – the basis for our prosperity.“
The idea of cutting corporation tax was floated in the Sunday Express last month as a way of wooing banks considering leaving the UK because of an impending Brexit.
Former chancellor George Osborne had previously floated the idea of cutting corporation tax to 15% to reassure businesses worried about the impact of Brexit. He had already reduced the rate from 28% to the current 20% during his time in office.
May upset some business leaders in June when she entered Downing Street with a promise to be guided “not by the interests of the privileged few” but by the concerns of ordinary workers. 
A few months later, her hardline rhetoric on immigration at the Conservative party conference, which suggested the government was headed for a hard Brexit outside the European single market, sparked further concern in boardrooms.
In Monday’s speech, she will also offer an olive branch to business leaders over plans to place workers on company boards, which have prompted a backlash in the City.
Referring to the upcoming green paper on corporate governance, the prime minister will emphasise that she will take business leaders’ opinions into consideration. “This will be a genuine consultation – we want to work with the grain of business and to draw from what works. But it will also be a consultation that will deliver results,” she will say.
Asked about this on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the business secretary, Greg Clark, declined to confirm that the worker representation plans would remain in their original form, saying only: “We will put forward a series of ways in which those voices can be represented on boards.”
Clark did say the government could insist on curbs for top executive pay in return for pro-business policies, saying: “Part of this agreement we need to have is that we need a much more rigorous approach to executive pay.” This could include barring pay rises which shareholder votes have opposed, he said.
Hours later, Jeremy Corbyn will tell industry leaders that “Labour will be on the side of the innovators, entrepreneurs and investors” as long as they “live up to their side of the deal” by treating workers fairly. 
The Labour leader will say companies must pay decent wages, respect workers’ rights and pay the taxes they owe. In return, a Labour government would use a £500bn national investment bank to “break the logjam” in bank lending, which has “starved” small- and medium-sized companies.
A Labour government would “use public intervention to unleash the creativity and potential of entrepreneurial Britain”, Corbyn will say.
He will insist he has a mandate for change from the Brexit vote and Donald Trump’s election as US president, which he says show that the current economic system has been rejected by voters faced with “ballooning” inequality and falling or stagnating living standards.
Corbyn will say in central London: “Labour is setting out the path to a better alternative that’s about good intervention. In fact, it’s intervention for the common good. In 1963, Harold Wilson famously said if the country was to prosper, a new Britain would need to be forged in the white heat of a scientific revolution.
“More than 50 years later we now face the task of creating a new Britain not just out of Brexit and a new relationship with Europe but from the challenge of the fourth industrial revolution – powered by the internet of things and big data to develop cyber physical systems and smart factories.”
The website of Voga, Britain’s foremost replica furniture importer, boasts that the firm “was created to make great design accessible to all”, before adding: “The greatest mid-century furniture designs are back where they belong: in your homes.”
Except they’re not. They are in fact in a warehouse in County Kildare where, unless the UK customers who ordered them travel to Ireland to collect them, or pay a third-party delivery firm to do so, they will be resold or destroyed.
Among them is a £441 chair ordered by Orla McGrath back in March, made in the style of Danish designer Finn Juhl. The confirmation email stated it would take up to 12 weeks to arrive at her Manchester home, and the full sum, including delivery, was debited from her account. Those 12 weeks came and went, then out of the blue in August she was contacted by a Dublin shipping company demanding £70 to deliver the chair from Ireland.
McGrath called Voga, only for the firm to disclose that it had moved to Ireland since she placed her order. It offered to deduct £68 from the price of the chair to cover the extra shipping costs.
Voga, it transpires, reinvented itself as an Irish company in May to escape new UK copyright laws that would have rendered much of its merchandise illegal. There’s no mention of the relocation on its website, which also does not give an address, and the FAQs on delivery and extra charges are silent on the issue. Only deep down in the terms and conditions is it mentioned that customers must arrange their own delivery from Ireland.
McGrath is an early casualty of a change in British legislation which has made it a criminal offence to sell replicas of design icons without a pricey licence. The amendment to the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, which came in to force in July, retrospectively extends the design rights to unregistered classic works created after 1957 from 25 years after their launch to 70 years after the designer’s death. This sounds the death knell for affordable replicas of 20th-century bestsellers such as the Arco floor lamp and Arne Jacobsen’s Egg chair and threatens to put scores of companies that supply them out of business.
A further proposed rule change will slap copyright on iconic pre-1957 designs which never qualified for copyright protection in the first place, making it a criminal offence to incorporate any element of them into a new work. This means that anyone without a licence from the copyright holder who is selling , for example, the Finn Juhl-inspired chair bought by McGrath could face a £50,000 fine and up to 10 years in prison. Householders who want to get the look will now have to fork out thousands rather than hundreds for a piece of furniture, and magazines will be penalised if they show photos of items protected by the copyright without buying a licence.
Voga, which sells copies of classic designs for up to seven times less than the full price, says it was forced to decamp to Ireland where the 25-year design right still applies. It can legally sell replicas to UK customers so long as it doesn’t deliver themto the UK. there. Third-party shippers who deliver them under a separate contract are not breaking the law, and Voga says it will deduct the extra cost from the bills of affected customers.
“It’s unfortunate that due to the law change and the influx of orders some customers were impacted, and that moving systems to Ireland affected our ability to communicate with them effectively,” a Voga spokesperson says. “We thought we’d have until the end of the year to fulfil existing orders,but unfortunately the government deadline was brought forward at the last-minute.”
McGrath’s experience illustrates the shambles into which the new laws have plunged the design industry. Legislation to revolutionise long-standing design right laws was rushed out with a speed that experts say could cripple the British replica furniture, jewellery and decorative arts market. Almost overnight, companies that had been trading legitimately for decades found that they would be committing a criminal offence if they continued to sell their stock. Meanwhile, consumers will have to wait up to 40 years for bestselling designs to emerge from the new copyright.
It was the lobbying might of the Swiss design giant Vitra that forced the law change. It campaigned for UK copyright laws to be aligned with the 1998 European design directive which sought to give mass-produced furniture the same protection as books, music and photography across the EU. In the UK, unregistered industrially produced furniture was protected by a design right of only 25 years after its first year of manufacture, and the European parliament had agreed it could preserve this rule when it issued the directive. But Vitra, which holds distribution rights for original Herman Miller creations, including the Eames lounge chair, claimed this had spawned a cheap replica market in the UK which cost it €250m a year in lost profits.
In February 2015 the Intellectual Property Office said the law would come into force in 2020 to give companies time to get rid of compromised stock and invest in new designs. It would be applied retrospectively so that furniture with long-lapsed design rights would receive a new copyright lasting 70 years after the designer’s death. Vitra, along with three other big distributors, had wanted the law change within six months, so threatened legal action – and in November 2015 the IPO announced that replica sales of works of “artistic craftsmanship” would become illegal in 2016. But it is the proposal to close a loophole that exempts pre-1957 designs that never qualified for copyright from the new rules that threatens to destroy British suppliers, since most of the 15 best selling creations predate that watershed. Some have already gone bust after investing in new stock and designs following the government’s promised five-year transition period.
Their predicament is compounded by the fact that no one can define which works are deemed to have “artistic craftsmanship”. The Law Society has asked in vain for guidance; the government admits it doesn’t know. Instead it declares that the courts must decide on a case by case basis.
“We had a deluge of orders before the law changed, and we don’t know which ones to stop since there is no list of which designs qualify for copyright,” says Scott Appleton of Scott Howard Iconic Designs. He has written six times to Vitra and its fellow lobbyists asking which designs cannot be replicated, but has heard nothing. “We used to bring in four containers of Eames lounge chairs a week; now its a trickle because we don’t know if and when they will be outlawed.”
Legal experts are appalled by the rushed legislation. Professor Lionel Bently, director of the Centre for Intellectual Property and Information Law, says it was not required by EU law, and his concerns were ignored by politicians. “The odd thing about the pre-1957 artistic works that the government is now going to protect by copyright, is that no copyright ever subsisted in these works under British law,” he says. “The latest consultation proposes to bring these works into copyright without any transitional provisions, which will simply make illegal the sale of copies that have been lawfully made or imported before the change in the law. It is completely extraordinary.”
The IPO, meanwhile, says the legislation was necessary to protect designers, even though the creators of most of the bestselling works are long dead.
Vitra hails the new law as a victory for the design industry. “We welcome the decision of the British government which mandates that artistic designs will soon fall under the same copyright protection in the UK as they do in other European countries,” says a spokesperson who declines to answer which of the works it distributes qualify as artistic.
However, far from benefiting designers, the amendment will in fact hobble them, according to Ivan Macquisten, from the Expired Copyright Homeware Organisation, a campaign group set up to oppose the changes. “Any designer setting out to create a new product is faced with the minefield of ensuring that it does not incorporate any element from an earlier design that could be deemed to have an artistic quality to it,” he says.
Among the casualties is the ordinary British consumer who can’t afford to pay thousands for classic designs, while those living outside the EU can legally buy and sell cheap replicas once the 25-year design right has expired. For now, companies like Voga can get round the rules by relocating to Ireland. Not for long, though: Vitra has set its sights on forcing the Republic to harmonise its rules with the European design directive.
Ironically, those most troubled by the new laws might have been the Eames chair’s designers, Charles and Ray Eames, who thought that great design should be available to the masses. Now those masses will have to pay around £4,000 for that swivelling leather look.
■ You have 14 days to cancel an online, mail or telephone order under the consumer contract regulations, provided you’ve had no face-to-face contact with the trader. If you’re shown an item then go home and confirm the order over the phone you lose the right to cancel.
■ If an item is customised you don’t have a cooling-off period and can only get a refund if it’s faulty or not as described.
■ When you place an order the retailer must send you written confirmation along with terms and conditions, details of the cooling-off period and how you can cancel. It should also advise of any charges for returning the item.
■ If a company asks for extra payment due to relocation after an order is confirmed, it may be in breach of contract and you should be entitled to cancel.
■ If the furniture doesn’t fit in your house, that is your problem and the retailer has no obligation to refund you – unless the the dimensions were wrongly advertised.Always ensure that you measure the room, hall and doorways etc before ordering to make sure the item can actually be delivered into your home.
■ If you legitimately bought a replica of a classic post-1957 design you can still legally own it and sell it on to a private individual or company. However, if it’s bought by a dealer they are committing an offence under the new rules.
• This article was amended on 21 November 2016. The headline was changed to reflect the fact that although the law change brings the UK into line with a European directive, it was not enforced by the EU.
The leader of a coalition of women’s groups has accused the government of making sexist policies by failing to take into account the impact that budget cuts will have on equality.
On the eve of a new report detailing the impact of austerity on women, Vivienne Hayes, chief executive of the Women’s Resource Centre, said the government was not implementing its own equality laws and called for spending decisions to be assessed through a “gendered lens”.
It comes after new research claimed women will have shouldered 85% of the burden of changes to the tax and benefits system by 2020, with the poorest women the worst affected. “We could say that the government is behaving in a sexist way,” Hayes said. “It’s not just a little bit more, it’s a considerable amount more than what men are paying.”
A new report published under the auspices of A Fair Deal For Women – an umbrella group that includes Rape Crisis, Women’s Aid, the Fawcett Society, UK Feminista and Rights of Women, among others – details the impact of austerity policies on women’s economic, working and family lives.
The research has found that women in the UK continue to be underpaid compared with men and are more likely to rely on benefits to top up their income, and so are suffering more from rising housing costs, cuts to social security and insecure jobs.
Women still face systematic discrimination at work, it says, earning almost a fifth less than men, or £300,000 less over their lifetimes. One in five young women have been offered a job that pays less than the minimum wage, and one in nine mothers reported that they had been forced out of work after becoming pregnant.
At the same time, women continue to spend more time than men on household chores, raising children and engaging in unpaid care work.
The report calls on policymakers to recognise links between the UK’s comparatively high rate of child poverty and the poverty of mothers, who constitute 90% of single parents. Some 40% of poor children in the UK are being raised by lone parent mothers, while lone parents are estimated to lose £1,000 a year as a result of cuts to working tax credits.
“The thing is that there is never a connection made between the poverty of children and their mothers,” Hayes said. “So we need to start talking about child poverty in relation to parents’ poverty. Children don’t just live on their own, it’s not just their poverty; it’s actually their parents’ poverty and I think that there is a great gulf between the work done around child poverty and women.”
Above all, the report calls for a gendered approach to policy making. Hayes said: “I don’t see how else we are going to get a shift unless it’s done at the point of decision, because then we are just left trying to change things instead of the first implementation being adequate.
“The report shows that it’s already the most marginalised, impoverished women that are suffering the most. And of course, the other thing is, collect the taxes from the corporations and the wealthy.”
The replica designer furniture market has become a huge industry, but a rushed change to the law has plunged it into chaos
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I became a business analyst (examining how a business works to identify any changes that need to be made) after leaving university and am now in my late 30s. It’s an area I’ve always interested in because it combines analytical thinking with, crucially for me, interaction with the workers who can both suggest changes and who have to carry them out. It is practical and personal.
I started out in staff jobs but found there were more opportunities on one-off projects with different companies – move from firm to firm, analyse the business, work with the team, formulate an outcome and move on.
So, by choice, five years ago I became a freelance/contract worker in the banking sector. It is well paid and I could afford a few weeks off between contracts relatively stress-free, until the next job I wanted came along. I used this time to do a distance learning degree in international affairs, which has added to my CV.
But this year, for the first time, I am seriously considering a change of career. In truth, I feel I have no choice. I finished my last contract in spring 2016 and since then ... nothing.
First, the contract market overall seems dead with 40%-50% less vacancies in banking, plus thousands of contractors and perms out looking. As a business analyst, there are fewer vacancies because companies and the government aren’t starting new projects – I’d guess this is the hangover from the Brexit decision.
Second, my department and role have moved into a combined IT function, which seems an industry trend. This is not a great fit for me as I don’t have an IT background and the methods of working leave me feeling I am in the wrong job, which I did not feel before.
I’ve always been people (not IT) focussed and under the new way of working interaction is limited. We are expected to write software specifications and test systems. This is not something I have done before and not the direction I want my career to go in.
I have to face the fact the old model is largely outmoded and most job adverts are for hybrid business and systems analyst types. Where now?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
Since 2008 I have had five insurance policies with Domestic & General to cover all my kitchen appliances.
I currently pay £59 a month. In September I reported that my frost-free integrated freezer was faulty, and six days later an engineer called.
He could not rectify the fault, and said he had ordered a part that another engineer would fit.
Eight days later he arrived, only to say that the freezer was, in fact, not repairable and that he would have to order a replacement. That was delivered a week later, but it was too big.
Since then I have been chasing on a daily basis and all I get is an automated response sent in the middle of the night or early morning. Eventually, I was told by the product placement team that they could not source a freezer that would fit and offered £518 so I could buy a suitable one myself. If I hadn’t phoned again I don’t suppose I would have been contacted.
This has been going on for six weeks and I have never received a telephone call from anyone, an apology or explanation for the appalling service. On one occasion staff hung up on me when I told them their customer service title was an oxymoron – I think she thought I was calling her a moron. The service has been terrible – is this normal? JP, Totnes, Devon
You are far from alone in complaining about Domestic & General – we have been getting many letters along these lines in the past few months.
A lack of promised call-backs seems to be a recurring complaint. Maybe the company does not employ enough staff.
Domestic & General said: “We sincerely apologise for the inconvenience caused to JP. We take great pride in providing the best possible service to our customers and recognise that we fell short on this occasion.”
It has agreed to pay you an extra £250 compensation to cover the delivery charge and for the failed installations.
Meanwhile, I would strongly urge you and other D&G customers to consider whether these products offer good value.
You were spending £59 a month – which may not sound too bad until you consider that is more than £700 a year. White goods are so much cheaper now that almost all of us would be better off sticking some money in a savings account and repairing or replacing goods as required.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
The combined impact of welfare cuts will leave struggling working families - the “just about managing” households Theresa May has vowed to help – worse off by more than £2,500 a year by 2020, according to research published days before her government’s first autumn statement.
A study of 187,000 households across the UK found that policies including cuts to universal credit and the four-year benefit rate freeze, coupled with rising rents and higher inflation, would see low-income working families typically lose £48.90 a week by the end of the decade.
The findings have alarmed councils and charities worried that the growing financial burden on low-income families will raise poverty and homelessness levels.
The research will increase the pressure on the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to offer some relief to the “just about managing” families – or “Jams” – in Wednesday’s autumn statement. He warned on Sunday that the government is facing a “sharp challenge” in the face of the Brexit vote, but indicated that there would be some limited relief for those who are struggling.
The prime minister will also announce tax breaks and an annual £2bn investment fund for research and development to big businesses on Monday – an offer likely to be criticised for failing to address welfare cuts. She will further woo big business by slashing corporation tax to the lowest level out of the world’s top 20 economies, according to reports.
On becoming prime minister in July, she promised to help “ordinary working class families” in a bold attempt to distance her from her predecessor’s austerity approach. She has confirmed there will be no fresh cuts to social security budgets in this parliament.
But the study, by the consultancy Policy in Practice, suggests that even after promising no more cuts the cumulative impact of the £12bn of welfare changes either already in place or due to come into force will be far harsher than that experienced by low-income households under the first wave of austerity-driven welfare cuts during David Cameron’s leadership.
The study is based on the financial circumstances of 187,475 households in 17 district, council and metropolitan borough councils in England, Scotland and Wales under a mix of political control. 
The analysis, which uses housing benefit and council tax data supplied by the local authorities, gauges the cumulative impact of various welfare reforms, including the benefit cap, housing benefit freezes, bedroom tax and universal credit changes. 
Official estimates of inflation and projected increases in private rent levels are factored in, as well as gains through the government’s “national living wage” and personal tax allowances.
When the impact of welfare cuts on out-of-work households is included, the average weekly loss drops to £41.45, or £2,155 a year – though that masks the extreme effect of reforms on some families, such as those hit by the lower benefit cap, who will lose hundreds of pounds a week. By contrast, the equivalent weekly household loss for both in-work and out-of-work families between 2013 and 2016 was £13.72.
Asked if he would reverse the universal credit cuts, Hammond told BBC1’s Andrew Marr Show that forecasts were “pointing to a slowing of economic growth next year and a sharp challenge for the public finances”.
“There are a range of reasons for that and we’ve got to make sure that what we do is responsible, that everything we do is compatible with building resilience in our economy as we go into a period where there will be some uncertainty around the negotiation over our exit from the EU and focus on making sure that our economy is match-fit,” he said.
The former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith resigned from the cabinet in March over the cuts to universal credit, complaining of then chancellor George Osborne’s “salami slicing” of the welfare budget.
A Department for Work and Pensions spokesman said: “Our welfare reforms are incentivising work and restoring fairness to the system, because we know that work is the best route out of poverty.
“Our employment rate is at a record high, wages are rising and unemployment is at an 11-year low. We continue to spend around £90bn a year supporting families, people with disabilities, people on low incomes and jobseekers. And by the end of this parliament we will have given local authorities £1bn in discretionary housing payments for their residents who may need extra help.”
Hammond has already disclosed that he will announce £1.3bn of improvements to Britain’s roads, which will include £1.1bn to reduce congestion and upgrade local roads and transport networks and £220m to tackle “pinch points” on England’s motorways and major A-roads.
Treasury sources have confirmed that he could also crack down on staff perks such as gym memberships and mobile phone contracts, which are offered to workers willing to forgo part of their salaries in return.
The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said Hammond should reverse the welfare cuts alongside reductions in disability benefits that will leave some claimants £30 a week worse off.
He also revealed Labour would support an increase in the 40p tax threshold from £43,000 next year to £50,000, a move promised in 2014 by Cameron to take millions of middle-income earners off the higher tax rate.
“It looks as though the threshold will be increased on Wednesday by the government and we would support that,” he said. “It’s to people who need a tax giveaway at the moment, because the mismanagement of the economy by the Conservatives is hitting them hard.
“What we need is a long-term strategy. This autumn statement, we’re going back to giveaways and gimmicks again,” he added.
Campaigners and MPs – including some Tory backbenchers – have been lobbying ministers to mitigate the impact of the welfare cuts by restoring the work allowance in universal credit, and to reconsider the planned £30-a-week cuts in employment and support allowance benefits due in 2017.
Alison Garnham, chief executive of Child Poverty Action Group, said: “The huge cuts hitting, or about to hit, families under previously announced policies will be devastating to these families, communities and local authorities, as child poverty rises and huge amounts of money gets sucked out of local shops and businesses. Until the government acts, councils are resigned to being in the ‘damage limitation’ business.
“The big choice facing the government now is does it live up to the prime minister’s words – for example, by reversing the cuts targeting working families under universal credit – or does it give austerity a rebrand by making soothing noises but largely pressing ahead with policies that will tip the just about managing into hardship and more children into poverty.”
The term “Jams” is used to refer to a loose group of about 6 million low-income working families, defined by the Resolution Foundation thinktank as having a net income of between £12,000 and £34,000 a year, although in practice many in this group switch regularly between employment and unemployment in an insecure job market. Their incomes have remained largely flat for a decade.
In her first speech to the CBI’s annual conference, the prime minister will announce increases in government investment in research and development worth £2bn a year by 2020 and an “industrial strategy challenge fund” to back priority technologies.
She will also announce a review of current research and development tax incentives to ensure the global competitiveness of the UK as a home for scientists, innovators and tech investors.
The challenges faced by the government in tackling the economic dominance of the south of England has been illustrated by a report showing that London is attracting a disproportionate share of graduates.
Ahead of Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement this week, the report by thinktank Centre for Cities, published on Monday, found that one in four recent university leavers chose to work in the capital, a brain drain harming the prospects of other cities by depriving them of the skills they need, as the economy shifts towards knowledge-intensive activities.
Alexandra Jones, the chief executive of Centre for Cities, said: “The government will not achieve its vision of extending prosperity and growth across the country unless it takes steps to help more cities attract and retain the UK’s top talent.”
The report, titled The Great British Brain Drain: Where Graduates Move and Why, used data on university leavers and the jobs market to map where graduates end up. It found that 24% of new graduates from UK universities in 2014 and 2015 were working in London within six months of finishing their degree.
Centre for Cities researchers found that London was pulling in graduates with the highest marks from leading UK universities. In 2014-15, the capital attracted 38% of new graduates with firsts and 2:1s from leading research universities, known as the Russell Group, who moved for a job. The figure is about 13 times more than Manchester, the second most popular destination for that group.
The report said the trend was clearer still for new graduates from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge. London gained 52% of Oxbridge graduates who moved for work after finishing university.
Evidence suggested that jobs were the most important factor influencing where graduates chose to move, the thinktank said. They were also attracted by the prospect of good career progression. But researchers found no relationship between graduates moving for work and the wages they were offered in the cities they chose. Policymakers should draw lessons from those findings, Jones said.
“Wage subsidies and other specific graduate retention policies will not tackle the root causes of this issue. Instead, the priority for national and local leaders should be strengthening city region economies, and increasing local demand and opportunities for graduates,” she said.
“In the autumn statement, the government should therefore focus on boosting economic growth in city regions across the country by investing in large-scale housing and transport projects. It should also use the new economic and industrial strategy to reinforce and complement the devolution deals currently in place for city regions like Greater Manchester, to give them greater scope to grow their economies, and to develop and attract talented workers.”
The Centre for Cities study helps build a picture of London’s dominance in the UK economy, illustrated by Observer data published on Sunday showing that 310,000 graduates have left the north of England in the past decade. Jim O’Neill, a former Treasury minister and the architect of George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse”, said more initiatives were needed to reverse the brain drain. The former chairman of Goldman Sachs Asset Management resigned from the government in September.
There have been doubts as to whether Theresa May is as committed to the north as her predecessor, David Cameron, with reports suggesting she also wants to focus on other rural and industrial areas in response to the Brexit vote.
Council leaders in Manchester, Leeds, Newcastle and Sheffield, along with the Labour candidates for Greater Manchester mayor and the mayor of the Liverpool city region, have written to the chancellor calling for east-west transport links to be made a priority.
Study finds lack of track record rules out cheap credit and drives them to high-cost loans, which in turn lowers scores further
Your articles on insecure employment at UK universities (University staff contracts ‘like Sports Direct’, 17 November) rightly draw attention to the appalling position of those on casual contracts (Dawn cleaning shift, shower, then teach: survival as a lecturer, 17 November; Universities are using casual contracts to put profit before people, theguardian.com, 17 November). There is, however, an important additional dimension: “permanent” jobs at universities are often permanent in name only. Two rather different examples: last year, my own department declared a young lecturer redundant less than two years after employing her on a permanent contract. At roughly the same time, Wolverhampton University made 19 full professors redundant from “permanent” posts because, Times Higher Education reported, its vice-chancellor said it was “refocusing and reducing staff numbers in some areas of activity whilst growing in other areas”.
Mrs Thatcher’s government abolished “tenure”, it was said, so that university managers could cut out “dead wood” like any other business. Professor Conrad Russell warned at the time that we “might lose more live wood than dead”. So it has proved: university leaders have learned to use redundancy as routine way of managing budgets, with scant regard to the damage it does to people, careers, scholarship, or academic freedom. Dead wood? Often very much alive until chopped down.
Professor John Holford 
Robert Peers chair in adult education, University of Nottingham
• Thanks for your article highlighting what has essentially been a downward spiral for many years for those of us who are crazy enough to work in the academic world. My experience reflects those expressed in the article and I feel that as a woman it is all the more painful to work in academia. I work at a Russell Group university and I have been on short-term contracts for most of my career (since I acquired my PhD in 2002). As a part-timer, the system is skewed against me as in order to apply for extremely rare promotions I am required to fulfil criteria that I cannot possibly achieve in my two days a week. This seems sexist to me, since many women turn to part-time work to raise a family – as I did. My contract is for research and I am highly published in my field: I am passionate about my work and that is why I put up with the conditions. I also love teaching, although I am paid for this separately by the hour. The students I teach do not suffer because I am highly experienced and put more hours in than I am paid for. To be honest, the fact that these students are paying such huge fees places pressure on me to do a good job despite the way I am treated.
Name and address supplied
• My own experience of highly insecure hourly paid teaching, while a PhD student and subsequently, reflects what is increasingly the norm. A high proportion of teaching is delivered by casualised staff, who are often not regarded by permanent faculty as “proper” workers.
The truth is that those who do this work are not doing so to earn pin money, or even to get teaching experience. In an ever more desperate funding situation, casualised teachers do the work to pay rent and buy books. It is a precarious existence that few would envy. Nor is it good for those students whose teaching is delivered by a succession of demoralised staff with little institutional investment. 
Name and address supplied
• Though always present to a degree, the casualisation of academic staff in Britain has mushroomed into a degraded version of an earlier situation where such staff were postgraduate students working for a higher degree or, in the natural sciences, teaching as a form of indentured labour while researching for a doctorate, usually with the likelihood of subsequently finding a tenured post. The relative decline of tenured posts in UK higher education has been fatal to these models.
The phenomenon is far from unique to the UK, as much international research has demonstrated, nor, sadly, particularly new. Throughout much of the 20th century British universities, even elite ones, worked on this basis. Indeed, in his 1904 book London Education, Sidney Webb outlined his preferred employment model for the recently reorganised University of London: “The principal professors, upon whom mainly we must depend for research, should, of course, have life tenures, high salaries and abundant leisure, whilst the bulk of the university teachers required by so extensive an undergraduate population as that of London will necessarily be engaged for short terms, earn only modest salaries, and work at times and seasons convenient to those whom they serve.” 
Christopher T Husbands
Emeritus reader in sociology, LSE
• Short-term contracts for university researchers are nothing new. Back in 1999 the Institute of Physics recognised this situation and produced a book of advice to young scientists and engineers researching in universities on how to plan a career in this precarious world. Using the skills developed as a university researcher to pursue a rewarding career outside academia was one option discussed. Some of those interviewed for your report might have benefited from this advice.
Mike Lee
Rossendale, Lancashire
• The myth that “if you’re good enough you will emerge from this rite of passage into a secure job” must be opposed. As chair of the UCU anti-casualisation committee, I am regularly contacted by desperate people with brilliant minds and outstanding work who are ravished by depression, hunger and a despondency I recognise from my own history. We must ask why it is considered acceptable for vice-chancellors to rake in huge salaries, or why so much money is blown on building projects with little thought to those who teach and research inside them.
Vicky Blake 
Leeds
• The human cost of this Sports Direct-style system is shaming, not least because the UK’s global academic reputation has been built on an employment model that legitimates the exploitation of staff. But the issue for our society and economy as a whole is even more profound – if we treat even highly qualified, professional staff like this, what chance anyone else?
Sally Hunt
General secretary, University and College Union
• How ironic that you should publish Nicholas Maxwell’s plea (Letters, 17 November) for universities to engage in intelligent public education on the same day that you reveal sector-wide exploitation of academic employees. Our generously remunerated vice-chancellors have already high-tailed it in the opposite direction, content to undermine intellectual standards while easing many young adults towards unrecoverable debt.
Peter Shaw
Professor of biochemistry, University of Nottingham
• It strikes me that the Guardian is in an excellent position to do something about the state of precarious employment in UK universities. Why not use percentages of academics precariously employed as a new factor when calculating the rankings in your university guide? You might also consider the percentages of non-academic staff (librarians, IT staff, facilities staff, etc) on precarious contracts or employed by franchises or subsidiary companies.
Name and address supplied
• It isn’t only higher education that exploits its teachers on such a scale. The further education sector has also been in the habit of giving what are in effect zero-hours contracts, and so have local authority adult education and other providers such as the Workers’ Educational Association. For what is a very modest hourly rate, teachers are (and always have been) routinely expected to prepare and deliver lessons, produce teaching materials, mark or provide written feedback on students’ work, deal with voluminous paperwork, provide educational guidance, attend meetings and training events etc. There is seldom any differentiation in the hourly rate – a highly skilled and experienced teacher routinely can receive the same hourly rate as someone who is teaching (often with no teaching qualification) for the first time.
There is almost no way anyone can make even a modest living out of teaching in this sector. This means that a diverse workforce is extremely difficult to achieve as the only people who can afford to work on this basis are those who have an alternative source of income, such as a high earning partner or a private income. 
Anne Winner
Oxford
• When I was an “associate” (zero-hours) lecturer at Edge Hill University, hours of work could be changed from term to term. The one small consolation was that I was earning the rate for the job, although if total hours and earnings are nugatory that is pretty irrelevant.
So, I became a supply teacher. Out of the frying pan into the fire? Local authority supply pools have been replaced by private agencies competing to underpay teachers and overcharge schools. Teachers working for private agencies are also excluded from the Teachers’ Pension Scheme.
I was fortunate in that I found work with Sefton Supply Service, one of the last council-run schemes still paying the rate and teachers’ pension. However, now it looks as though that particular lifeboat is sinking as well.
Welcome to the precariat – we have nothing to lose but low pay and zero-hours contracts.
Richard Knights
Liverpool
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
An MoD spokesman says the UK “does not have” powerful and controversial thermobaric weapons (Report, 18 November). This is a case of weasel words: the MoD does not accept the use of the term thermobaric as “there is no internationally accepted definition”. So the thermobaric AMG-114N missiles fired by UK Reaper drones have been relabelled as “enhanced blast” instead. The British army’s light anti-structures missile, a shoulder-launched rocket for destroying buildings and bunkers, is similarly a rebranded M72A9 thermobaric weapon. The statement is therefore correct, simply because the MoD will never use the word thermobaric. They will, however, continue to use thermobaric weapons.
David Hambling
London
• Well, there’s a surprise (Cold calls to be banned, 19 November). George Osborne and co must be the only people in the country who did not predict the parasites and fraudsters waiting in the wings to siphon off £19m of pension funds last year, after his disastrous changes. An utter disgrace.
Catherine Roome
Staplehurst, Kent
• Duncan Grimmond (Letters, 18 November) may get high marks for arithmetic, but only a low score for comprehension. Alan Payling (Letters, 17 November) compared his weekly wage (£6 10s 6d) with the cost of an LP (£1 12s 6d). The correct ratio is therefore 24.9%, or as Alan said “more or less a quarter of my wages”.
Bob Gunn
Kingswood, Surrey
• I cannot bear to see any more publicity for The Grand Tour, which cost £4m an hour to produce (Report, 18 November). On the previous spread you reported on care workers on 12-hour days, earning £64 a day. This programme may be escapism for some, but it makes me feel sick.
Mary Walker
St Albans, Hertfordshire
• Robert Vaughn’s real supreme moment in The Magnificent Seven (Letters, 18 November ) came later, in an echo of the fly-catching incident, when he redeemed himself by killing three of the Seven’s opponents in one single shooting round.
Marion Miller
Nantwich, Cheshire
• Perhaps HM should try crowdfunding for repairs to her palace (Queen given pay rise for £369m refit, 19 November).
Alicia Baker
London
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Millennials are missing out on the boom in cheap credit and using expensive payday loans, because poor credit scores lock them out of the best deals.
Borrowers born after 1982 are typically paying a higher rate on loans and credit cards than those born earlier, according to analysis of more than 150,000 credit files.
The study, undertaken by the charity Toynbee Hall and the employee loan firm SalaryFinance and shared with the Guardian, found that younger borrowers were twice as likely to have taken out high-cost payday loans than those from the baby-boomer generation, and on average had used them twice as often.
The analysis found that millennials were much more likely to have poor credit records than older people. This is in part because they do not have a track record of payments, but also because the use of payday loans drags scores down.
Carl Packman, Toynbee Hall’s research manager, said young people were finding it difficult to access mainstream finance that helps to build their credit score.
“With few choices, and the pressures of low-wage jobs and increased insecurity, borrowing money out of necessity can only be done through alternative finance like payday lenders or friends and family, and not everyone has the luxury of the latter,” he said. 
“Not only are the borrowing costs of a payday loan much more expensive than with mainstream finance, we can now demonstrate very strong evidence that it is having a detrimental effect on people’s credit scores and therefore their ability to build up that score and access cheaper forms of finance in the future.” 
Loan and credit card providers have battled to top the best-buy tables in recent years. Rates on personal loans have fallen to record lows, with several banks now offering borrowing of up to £15,000 at an interest rate of just 3%.
Banks, meanwhile, have sought to attract credit card customers with longer and longer interest-free periods. Virgin Money recently launched a credit card offering customers 30 months of interest-free spending.
Older borrowers are able to get approval for these deals, but millennials are paying more. The analysis showed that for unsecured loans of up to £5,000, the average rate paid by adults born after 1982 was 18%, compared with 16% for those born between 1965 and 1981 and 15% for those born between 1946 and 1964.
The older baby boomers had typically taken out four payday loans each, while millennials had taken more than seven.
Packman said: “I think for many younger people the relative ease at which a payday loan can be obtained, compared with a small-sum personal loan from a bank or arrangement of a higher overdraft limit, has outweighed the potential risk of falling into a debt cycle. This has contributed both to the attraction and normalisation of a payday loan.
“Their lack of a financial track record counts against them and often the only answer left for them is to take out credit products like payday loans which, whether we like it or not, is damaging to credit scores and their ability to climb the credit ladder to more affordable forms of finance.”
Andrew Hagger, a personal finance expert at the website MoneyComms, said lenders looked at a range of factors to judge people’s creditworthiness, and many went against younger borrowers. “They might ask, for example, how long you have been in your job, which of course is going to count against millennials.”
Hagger said millennials were often caught in a “catch-22. If you can’t get finance it is difficult to build a credit record”.
Asesh Sarkar, chief executive of SalaryFinance, said: “With millennials set to make up 50% of the global workforce by 2020, there is an increasing need for employers to step up and support this group of workers who are cut out of mainstream finance.
“The government’s identification of the problems of the just about managing (Jams), who have less than a months worth of savings in the bank, support our urgent calls for better financial support systems for people in work but struggling.”
Morrisons is cutting the price of petrol to below £1 a litre for the first time since the Brexit vote, escalating a pre-Christmas price war among Britain’s biggest supermarkets.
From Monday, Morrisons customers spending more than £50 in stores will be able to fill their cars with unleaded petrol for 99.9p a litre, a 10p cut compared with Sunday.
Diesel drivers buying their groceries at Morrisons will also receive a 10p a litre cut, paying just over £1.
Roger Fogg, services director at the Bradford-based chain, said the price reduction was designed to help customers in the run-up to Christmas, including those shopping on Black Friday. The offer is available until 3 December.
“With Christmas around the corner, our customers tell us they very much welcome our help in reducing the cost of their fuel,” Fogg said. “That’s why we are turning the clock back to the start of this year when petrol prices were typically below £1 a litre.”
It is the third time in a week Morrisons has cut fuel prices. Last week the supermarket – along with Asda, Tesco, Sainsbury’s – cut fuel prices by up 3p a litre, bringing relief to drivers after several months of price hikes. The price cuts took petrol down to 110.7p a litre, and diesel to 112.7p.
Fuel prices have risen in the months after the Brexit vote prompted a sharp drop in the value of the pound.
Government figures showed that average fuel prices had reached their highest level since July last year, to 116.6p a litre for petrol and 119p a litre for diesel.
The Serious Fraud Office will on Monday ask a London employment tribunal to hear an unfair dismissal claim by a former senior banker at Barclays in private.
The attempt to deter reporting of the case will be challenged by a number of news outlets – including the Guardian – and comes as the SFO continues its investigation into Barclays’ emergency cash call during the 2008 banking crisis.
The unfair dismissal case is being brought by Richard Boath, who until March was chairman of financial services at Barclays and has been interviewed by the SFO as part of its long-running investigation.
Few details about his claim are known although he is reported to be making the case under whistleblower protection laws. This means the potential payout is unlimited, unlike the £78,000 cap that applies to tribunals.
The SFO said it was “seeking orders that the hearings be held in private so as to preserve the confidentiality of the claimant’s interview by the SFO, and that there should be corresponding restrictions on the publication of such matters”. It added that an alternative would be “for the parties not [to] be permitted to refer to the contents of the claimant’s interview by the SFO in these proceedings”.
The SFO has said it will decide by March 2017 whether to bring charges in connection to the events in 2008 when Barclays avoided a taxpayer bailout by raising £7bn from investors, including in the Middle East.
The bank is contesting a £50m fine by the City regulator in relation to the fundraising during which the Financial Conduct Authority said it “acted recklessly” over the disclosure of £322m of fees paid to Qatar Holdings. The FCA penalty has been put on hold while the SFO continues its investigation, which Barclays has previously said includes its ex-finance director Chris Lucas.
Barclays has said it disclosed this fee arrangement in the first fundraising in June 2008, but not in the following one in October 2008.
The SFO had raised the possibility last year of offering Barclays a deferred prosecution agreement, which would require cooperation from companies that in turn need to admit to offences, although this appears to have come to nothing.
Barclays declined to comment ahead of the tribunal. It is contesting a £721m claim by Amanda Staveley – a financier who helped the bank find billions of pounds during 2008 – who argues she should have received fees for being involved in the the crucial financings.
My wife has had an M&S Bank credit card for more than 12 years and I am the second card holder. This week she received a letter asking me to provide photocopies of documents such as my passport, driving licence and tax details. Two had to include a photo, and they had to be notarised by a list of approved people.
I rang M&S Bank to see if this was some sort of scam as the prepaid return envelope did not contain M&S in the address. I was assured it was officially an M&S request. I was also told that it had been getting a large number of calls questioning the request.
I asked why this information was needed – I was told me it was to make the account more secure. I expressed my fears that sending such sensitive information through the post to what looks like a third party would reduce my security and I asked what would happen if I did not send it. I was told nothing would change and that the account would continue as before.
Any chance of asking someone at M&S what is going on – it makes no sense to me. PDW, by email
You were quite right to question the validity of this request – sending out those documents to an unnamed company would have been foolhardy in the extreme. We asked M&S Bank for an explanation and it has confirmed the request was legitimate. “In order to protect our customers from financial crime it’s important that the information we hold is as up to date as possible. This means that, from time to time, we may ask existing customers to update the information we hold.”
It went on to say that this “helps protect customers and the financial system from financial crime”. We could understand this request if you were the main account holder, but this seems to be rather overzealous as you pay off your card in full by direct debit every month and have been customers for 12 years.
M&S Bank services are provided by HSBC, which has been in all sorts of bother with the authorities over money laundering. This is most likely part of the resulting clean-up.
Although M&S says it is looking to change the address on its return envelopes to make it clearer it really is M&S, my advice is to take the documents into your nearest branch. M&S has confirmed customers can do this.
I suspect it won’t be long before fraudsters really do start sending out fake letters like this to get personal details.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Touts who use automated software to bulk-buy thousands of concert tickets for resale at a profit would face prison sentences under new proposals from the Labour party.
The plan to outlaw the use of ticket-harvesting “bots” was proposed just days after industry experts warned MPs “industrial-scale market abuse” by professional touts was pricing genuine fans out of cultural and sporting events such as rugby union’s autumn internationals. 
Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader and shadow culture spokesman, has accused the government of “failing fans” on the issue and is leading the party’s move to introduce criminal penalties for the worst offenders.
Match tickets for next month’s sell-out rugby union international between England and Australia at Twickenham are listed on resale websites for as much as £2,960 a pair – a mark-up of 1,210%. Last year ministers dismissed the need for consumer protections, arguing instead that “prices should be set by supply and demand in the secondary ticketing market”. 
Market leaders such as websites StubHub and GetMeIn!, owned by US giant Ticketmaster, typically earn a 25% commission on resales and maintain they are under no obligation to “police or monitor” whether sellers are professional touts. An independent report commissioned by the government last year found “little sign” that listings on resale sites included sufficient information for customers.
Labour MPs, led by Watson, have tabled an amendment to the government’s digital economy bill in a bid to control a market described as “highly unethical” by culture, media and sport select committee witnesses last Tuesday. It proposes that touts found to have used the software could be jailed for up to 51 weeks and fined a maximum of £5,000.
Reg Walker, a security consultant and ticketing-fraud expert, told the committee that touts using bots were able to rack up profits of tens of thousands of pounds. “A tout will harvest, say, 1,000 tickets for an event and simply up the price by a tenner. Those types of touts buy in bulk, so he will buy 1,000 tickets and he will make a £10 profit. He has made 10 grand off the one show. It is an extraordinary amount of money.”
Walker added that touts were also able to artificially inflate ticket prices by up to 30 times face value by harvesting small numbers of in-demand tickets for high-profile concerts and sports fixtures. Earlier this month, tickets for Phil Collins’s comeback residency at the Royal Albert Hall in June sold out in just 15 seconds, before appearing on GetMeIn! for as much as £2,200 each.
Similarly, last year research by Labour revealed a pair of tickets for the Rugby World Cup final were selling on resale site for Viagogo for £51,926 – over 50 times their face value of £1,030. 
Watson has since criticised the government’s failure to act on the issue. The prime minister pledged to “look very carefully” at solutions when questioned in the Commons by a Conservative MP, Nigel Adams, who tabled his own amendment to criminalise touts’ use of bots last month. Watson said: “The government is failing fans despite the prime minister’s warm words. They promised to protect rugby fans from unfair ticket touting but with the autumn internationals just begun it is clear that fans are being ripped off left, right and centre. The government must now act.
“London 2012 showed how major international tournaments can take place in the UK and have their tickets protected from touts. Ministers should have used that model for major tournaments to ensure that fans get a fair deal.”
Selling tickets for the 2012 Olympics without permission was a criminal offence. Indeed May, then the home secretary, hiked the maximum penalty for touts from £5,000 to £20,000, arguing it was a “substantial deterrent to serious and organised criminal groups”.
Watson’s intervention will pile yet more pressure on an industry that already faces the prospect of an HM Revenue & Customs inquiry into allegations that professional resellers do not declare the full extent of their earnings, in addition to an existing Competition and Markets Authority investigation into whether the practice breaches consumer protection laws. 
Meanwhile the culture, media and sport select committee has broadened the scope of its investigation into ticket abuse. While initially the inquiry focused solely on the use of bot software by touts, the committee said the nature of the evidence it had heard warranted an investigation into the secondary-ticketing industry in its entirety. 
Workers in the burgeoning gig economy face poverty in retirement unless the government acts to change its flagship pension policy and makes it easier for them to save, experts have warned.
The pensions minister, Richard Harrington, has indicated that he is considering ways to include self-employed workers into the flagship auto-enrolment scheme, but he has not confirmed whether this will be part of a review planned for next year.
Recent changes to the pension system have boosted the number of employees who save into one and benefit from contributions made by their employer. Anyone earning more than £10,000 from their firm is automatically enrolled into a pension, and their employer makes contributions, currently worth 1% of earnings.
However, those in self-employment or doing a patchwork of low-paid jobs are not able to save through the scheme.
Steven Cameron, pensions director at insurer Aegon, said the changing nature of self-employment meant that the government needed to act. “It is not sustainable government policy to exclude the self-employed, who are no longer made up solely of the traditional small business owner but now include a fast-growing contractor population,” he said. “The differentiation between employed and self-employed has been further blurred by the gig economy and the recent ruling that Uber workers should be treated as employees.”
Figures show the number of self-employed workers contributing to a personal pension have plummeted since the start of the century. About 1.1 million individuals were paying into a retirement fund in 2001-02, but by 2014-15 the figure had fallen to just 380,000.
Meanwhile, the government’s Family Resource Survey found that while 60% of working-age adults employed as staff had pensions, among the self-employed the figure was just 16%. Women were much less likely to be making payments into a scheme, with participation at just 12% against 17% for men.
Former pensions minister Steve Webb said there was “not a moment to wait” to address the issue of falling contributions by self-employed workers. “Pension membership among the self-employed – and self-employed women in particular – is chronically low and falling.”
Ros Altmann, who was pensions minister until the summer, said while self-employed workers had in the past been well-paid, “things are different for those young startup, gig economy type roles”. She said: “With auto-enrolment the lowest opt-out rates have been amongst the young, so if we have got a lot of young people starting their own businesses there will be a potential divide in the future between the haves and have-nots in pensions”.
Experts said they were most concerned about those in their 40s, who comprise about two-thirds of the self-employed workforce. They will be locked out of the new lifetime Isa (Lisa), launched by George Osborne to encourage savings for property and retirement.
Webb said his biggest concern was older workers who had started their own businesses only recently, perhaps after redundancy. “If you’re 53 and you’ve been in work previously and not built up a big pension, you are going to struggle – this is the group of people who won’t be able to stop working,” he said.
Research by pensions provider Old Mutual found that while 84% of 30- to 45-year-old employees were contributing to a pension scheme, among the self-employed just half were paying towards their retirement. Those who were saving were putting in an average of £290 a month, while their employed counterparts were saving £400. The main reason for not saving was not having enough money left to put by.
Jon Greer, pensions expert at Old Mutual Wealth, said: “The rapidly growing self-employed population aren’t saving enough for retirement and are sleepwalking towards poverty in later life.
“The government needs to step in and help. Ahead of the conservative party conference in October, Theresa May ordered a review of employment regulation and practices, but action is also needed.”
He called on the government to increase the age limit on the Lisa to 55 and consider allowing self-employed people to make withdrawals so they were not worried about locking up their cash.
Even those in employment may be missing out, the TUC warned. It estimates that 4.6 million workers do not qualify for auto-enrolment because they earn less than £10,000 a year. Because the limit applies to a job rather than total earnings, if you do more than one low-paid job, you will not automatically qualify for a pension.
The Pensions Policy Institute has estimated that about 80,000 people would be due a pension if they could add together earnings from their first and second jobs. Again, women are most likely to lose out, making up 60,000 of that number.
Tim Sharpe, policy officer at the TUC, said: “Automatic enrolment has been a great success, giving 6 million more people access to a workplace pension.
“But it mustn’t be allowed to become a policy that works well for men in traditional full-time work but excludes others. Millions of low-paid workers, most of them women, are still missing out. We need to remove the barrier of the earnings trigger so that the millions of workers in part-time work, including those holding down multiple jobs, are automatically enrolled into workplace pensions too.”
Self-employed workers have been helped by changes to the state pension, which brought the amount they can claim in line with that of workers, at just over £8,000 a year.
But Webb said the government should consider increasing the national insurance contributions paid by the self-employed and diverting the extra money into pension schemes for them. “We have the 2017 review of auto-enrolment coming up and we absolutely have to address this problem,” said Webb.
The government said that it had not confirmed which groups would be included in the review of auto-enrolment, but in an interview with the Financial Times Harrington said looking at how to extend auto-enrolment to the self-employed “should be the kind of thing that we are talking about”.
He added: “Many self-employed people could now be earning the minimum wage, maybe a bit more, but it is complicated. In the end we have to look at them being included in an envelope like the automatic enrolment system – and the same with people who have multiple jobs.”
Good news: figures issued this week revealed that mortgages are more affordable than they have ever been. Bad news: Donald Trump’s US election win is set to push up the cost of new fixed-rate mortgages on this side of the pond.
So if you are thinking about signing up for one of the cheap fixed-rate deals on offer, act now to avoid paying more than you need to.
According to the Council of Mortgage Lenders, home loan affordability has reached a “historic low” for both first-time buyers and home movers.
In statistics that the “priced out” generation may find hard to believe, the CML says that in September first-time buyers spent an average of just 17.8% of their monthly household income on mortgage repayments – partly reflecting August’s interest rate cut from 0.5% to 0.25%.
Meanwhile, the average five-year fix has fallen below 3% for the first time on record, and now stands at 2.98% compared with 3.93% in November 2014 and 4.68% in November 2011, according to the financial data website Moneyfacts.co.uk.
But Trump’s win looks set to trigger price rises for some UK borrowers, with mortgage broker John Charcol predicting that longer-term fixed-rate deals will be the first to be withdrawn or repriced upwards.
The US president-elect is promising tax cuts and a $550bn boost to infrastructure spending that will see the US “build the roads, highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, and railways of tomorrow”.
Economists reckon this will force the Federal Reserve, the US central bank, to raise interest rates more rapidly than had been expected, and all of this has sent shock waves through the world’s financial markets.
Swap rates – what the banks pay to borrow from each other, which play a big part in determining the pricing of fixed-rate mortgages and savings bonds – have increased sharply in the past few weeks, and this has accelerated since Trump’s win.
John Charcol reckons five- and 10-year fixes will be the first to see prices go up. Simon Collins at the firm says: “There’s definitely some upwards pressure ... it’s something that, if it happens, will happen quite quickly. A couple of the biggies will go, and others will follow.” He adds: “I can’t see them getting any cheaper. Is there any benefit to waiting? Probably not.”
Mark Harris at rival broker SPF Private Clients echoes this, saying: “The advice to borrowers who have their eye on a cheap rate is to secure it while they can.
“They are so low anyway, it is unlikely to be a move you will regret.”
Five-year fixed-rate mortgages have enjoyed a big increase in popularity, according to a survey by conveyancing firm LMS. This partly reflects the price drop highlighted above.
However, Andy Knee, chief executive of LMS, says economic and political uncertainty has also affected people’s priorities: “More people are looking for long-term security. They want to ensure they know exactly what they will owe and when while the terms of Brexit are battled out.”
Those with a big deposit or equity stake can get a five-year fixed-rate for under 2%.
At the time of writing, Coventry building society was arguably leading the pack with a five-year fix at just 1.84%. With this, the maximum loan is 50% of the property’s value, there’s a £999 product fee (which can be added to the mortgage), and you get a free valuation.
Tesco Bank – recently in the news because of the cyber attack it suffered – is offering a five-year fix at 1.89%, available where the maximum loan is 60%. There is a £995 product fee.
Meanwhile, Leeds building society has a five-year deal at 1.99% available up to 75% loan-to-value, which comes with a decent freebie: £1,000 cashback, plus a free valuation. But this carries a £1,499 completion fee.
The Coventry also has a deal whereby your monthly payments are fixed for seven years – ie, until the end of 2023 – at 1.99%. Again, the maximum is 50%.
It’s not just brokers and the like who are suggesting that now might be the time to act. Charlotte Nelson at Moneyfacts.co.uk says that with the gap between the average two-year and five-year fixed rate standing at just 0.63%, borrowers can opt for the security of a longer-term fix at little extra cost to their monthly repayments.
She adds: “Borrowers coming to the end of their fixed deal, or those sitting on their standard variable rate, should seriously consider opting for a new fixed rate now as there is no way of telling how low these deals can go.”
Collins points out that with many banks and building societies, their mortgage offers are valid for three months. This means you could apply for the mortgage now and, if the lender then brings out a cheaper deal a few weeks later, it may well let you switch (obviously check you would be allowed to do this). Tesco Bank recently extended the validity period of its formal mortgage offers for new customers from three to six months.
The bad news for savers hoping for interest rate rises is that there is little evidence of these being increased. When the Bank of England cut the base rate to a record low of 0.25%, it introduced a funding scheme for banks so they could pass on the reduction to borrowers without damaging their margins.
Senior bankers say this so-called “term lending scheme” means savings rates for customers are unlikely to rise much, despite what is happening in the money markets.
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
I find it incredibly difficult to buy Christmas presents for my grandparents. He’s 90, she’s 87. I used to buy books but their eyesight is declining. What do people of that age really appreciate as a Christmas gift?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
The busiest shopping day of the year is almost upon us, and the good news – or bad, depending on your point of view – is the Black Friday sale has moved well beyond being a 24-hour promotion, effectively stretching over more than a fortnight. But are the supposed bargains all they’re cracked up to be?
A random sampling of some of Amazon.co.uk’s offers suggests that, assuming the item in question is something you actually need, there are some good deals to be had – and some that are not quite as good.
For example, at the time of writing Amazon was offering Bang & Olufsen noise-cancelling in-ear headphones for £109 that were going for £199 at retailers including John Lewis. And while an LG 43-inch Ultra HD 4K smart TV, down from £599 to £399, looked like a real bargain, you can pick up what appears to be a higher-spec version of the TV for £399 – reduced from an RRP of £749.
Amazon introduced Black Friday to Britain in 2010, and along with Cyber Monday, which this year falls on 28 November, it’s now a key fixture of the retail sales calendar, with the emphasis on aggressively discounted electronic gadgets and domestic appliances.
Initially it was a 24-hour sale, but each year it seems to get bigger. Amazon, for example, kicked off its Black Friday promotion at one minute past midnight on Monday 14 November, and it will run until 23.59pm on Friday 25 November. Argos, meanwhile, is promising “13 whole days of exciting offers” from 18-30 November. Similarly, Tesco will be offering 11 days of deals, from Monday 21 November through to 1 December – up from four days last year – while eBay’s promotion runs for 13 days from 17-29 November.
Last year British consumers spent a record-breaking £3.3bn over the weekend of Black Friday and Cyber Monday, according to Experian and IMRG, and it could well go higher this year. While some will view it as a horrific American import, it is undoubtedly a big deal for retailers: last year, the week that included Black Friday was John Lewis’s biggest-ever for sales.
However, consumer body Which? this week condemned some retailers’ “misleading” Black Friday offers, saying that in many cases “shops are exaggerating discounts”. A Which? investigation into last year’s event tracked prices on 178 deals every day for five months, and found that only half were actually cheapest on Black Friday.Currys and online electrical retailer ao.com were singled out for making some discounts “look a lot more impressive than they actually were”.
Items expected to do well this year, according to research for the website VoucherCodes.co.uk, include DVDs, computer games and books, followed by clothing, footwear and accessories ahead of the festive party season.
Most retailers are keeping their Black Friday deals under wraps until nearer the time, but some have released information about the savings on offer. Argos, for example, has announced some of its deals, and says its offers include up to half price on kitchen electricals, 25% off homeware when you spend £30 or more, up to half price on toys, 25% off any indoor furniture over £150, and up to a third off electrical personal care items. Amazon also released some of its deals. So what did we find when we did a mini price-test of its offers?
Philips Viva Collection HD9220/20 Airfryer 
Amazon.co.uk was this week offering this for £69.99, down from an RRP of £200, it says. We couldn’t find it cheaper when we looked on Thursday. Philips says the suggested retail price is £180, though Argos was selling it for £99.99, and George at Asda had it for £149.96. Littlewoods were selling it for £189.99, which it said was a £40 saving on the £229.99 original price.
Bang & Olufsen B&O Play Beoplay H3 Premium Active Noise Cancellation in-ear headphones
Amazon was offering these for £109 – a £90 saving on the RRP. Again, we couldn’t find them cheaper. The Beoplay website had them for £199, as did John Lewis. A seller on eBay, meanwhile, wanted £136.89.
LG 43-inch LG ULTRA HD 4K smart TV 
Amazon was offering this for £399, down from £599. Ao.com had it for £599, while one was sold on eBay for £385 on Thursday. But Richer Sounds was offering in-store customers what appeared to be a higher-spec version for £399 – a £350 saving on the £749 RRP.
Philips Azur Performer Plus GC4526/87 steam iron 
Amazon had this for £34.99 – a £35.72 saving on the “was” price. An eBay seller, meanwhile, had it on for £49.99. An iron that appeared to be this one, or almost identical with an albeit slightly different product number, was listed on the Philips website with an RRP of £80, but was on Tesco’s website for £45.
So what’s the best advice for bagging a Black Friday bargain? Sarah Pennells at website SavvyWoman offers the following tips:
• Do your research. What features must your new TV have, for example? She says some shops use Black Friday “as a chance to offload old or unpopular stock”.
• Ignore the hype. Shopping comparison sites such as Idealo let you track an item’s price history across a range of retailers. A site called Camelcamelcamel does the same for Amazon.
• Don’t buy because it’s cheap. “If you don’t need it, don’t really want it or can’t afford it, it’s a waste of money.”
• Know your rights. If you order something online you have 14 days from the day after it arrives to cancel the sale and get a full refund, and another 14 days to return it.
• Watch out for fake websites. Just because it ends in .co.uk doesn’t mean it’s based in the UK, and bogus sites can have similar names to the real thing. If a website or retailer insists you pay by direct transfer (such as an online or mobile payment), be aware that your bank won’t give you your money back if the seller turns out to be a fraudster, or you’ve bought something that’s fake.
Solicitors who failed to warn of soaring ground rents on leasehold properties face a wave of claims for professional negligence, following Guardian Money revelations on a scandal that has engulfed thousands of unwitting homebuyers.
Many have been unaware that the ground rent on new-build leasehold properties they have bought can escalate dramatically in future years following the introduction of new clauses in which it doubles every decade. Although most housebuilders have switched to a new formula of increases based on RPI, some people are finding that the new-build home they bought as recently as 2010 is virtually unsaleable.
But a lifeline has emerged for distressed buyers in the form of the Council of Mortgage Lenders handbook, which is meant to guide the process of conveyancing. Graham Balchin of solicitors Carter Lemon Camerons says: “It is a requirement of most lenders [see the CML Handbook section 5.14.9] that the lender is informed of any increase in the ground rent that may materially affect the value of the property. If the conveyancing solicitor fails to warn the purchaser, and any lender providing a mortgage secured on the property, that the lease terms may adversely affect the value of the leasehold property, they may be liable in negligence.
“I have acted – and am currently acting – for a number of flat owners who have suffered substantial loss as a result of purchasing leasehold property with onerous ground rent clauses. In those claims we have been able to recover compensation from the solicitor.”
Balchin adds that the insurers for solicitors, who cover the cost of professional negligence claims, have accepted that a doubling of the ground rent every 10 years is an “onerous term”.
Money has also been contacted by Myles Hickey of solicitors Dowse & Co, who also suggests householders claim for professional negligence. In one case Hickey handled the client was on the hook for an increase in the initial £400 annual ground rent to an extraordinary £409,600. “It is scandalous that the solicitors acting for the leaseholders failed to pick up this glaring problem before contracts were exchanged. I would suggest that failure to alert a buyer to the risks they face from periodic doubling of ground rent is obvious professional negligence,” he says.
Some of the cases seen by Balchin are remarkable. “I was approached by someone who had bought a home in south-east London 20 years ago for £150,000. Since then the ground rent has gone up to £32,000 a year. A clause in his lease said the ground rent would increase to a percentage of the rentable value of the property. It’s something you see in some commercial leases, but not normally in residential. It was very well hidden and no one paid attention. It started at £50 a year, or 1% of the sale price, or 60% of the rentable value, whichever is higher. An experienced conveyancer would have understood it and advised the buyer. But most conveyancing is done by pretty junior people who don’t realise just how onerous these terms are.”
Many young buyers are encouraged by developers to use solicitors for conveyancing recommended by them, who then fail to warn the buyer of the onerous ground rent clauses.
Balchin says: “Estate agents are also to blame. They will recommend solicitors who will make the sale happen because the agent wants to get their commission. The agent, of course, is acting for the seller and can try to conceal just how high the ground rent is. In one case I was told of the agent saying the ground rent was just £27 per month, rather than £350 a year. That makes a very high figure for a flat in Nelson, Lancashire, sound quite reasonable. They don’t mention that the ground rent doubles every 10 years.”
Balchin points out that leasehold house buyers find themselves in a worse position than flat buyers. If a developer such as Taylor Wimpey sells the freehold of a block of flats, it has to offer the leasees a right of first refusal. But owners of leasehold homes have no such right. This explains why buyers of new-build houses have contacted Money after discovering that only a couple of years later the freehold on their home has been sold to another company without their approval. Buying the freehold can then become very expensive.
Balchin says he seeks compensation from the leaseholder’s conveyancing solicitor based on a surveyor’s valuation of what the property would be worth with and without the onerous ground rent clauses. But he warns that leaseholders need to begin legal action sooner rather than later: “A claim must be brought within six years of exchange of contracts.” Unfortunately, many people don’t realise until they come to sell, which can be too late. Ground rent clauses which rise linked to RPI are less likely to succeed as a claim than ones that double every 10 years, he adds.
Meanwhile, Conservative MP Peter Bottomley, joint-chairman of the all-party parliamentary group on leasehold reform, this week challenged Peter Redfern, chief executive of Taylor Wimpey, to explain his company’s policy. “Is there any reason to sell a new house leasehold except to put the new owner at a disadvantage? This may have been legal; it is clearly undesirable. A respectable company, I believe, should rule out this arrangement as corporate irresponsibility.”
In a statement, Taylor Wimpey indicated that it is prepared to look again at its ground rent clauses. It said: “We reviewed the mechanism for ground rent increases in 2011 and decided that the RPI was a more appropriate measure going forward. All Taylor Wimpey homes on developments commenced after 2011 have been sold with ground rent increases linked to the RPI. All purchasers have independent legal advice.
“Until recently, we hadn’t been aware of the concern of some customers and homeowners regarding these pre-RPI clauses and the difficulties that they are currently experiencing in selling or mortgaging their homes. Having heard the cases described and in order to establish the facts, we are undertaking a review.”
• The solicitors featured above are offering a free evaluation for leaseholders seeking to claim professional negligence. At Carter Lemon Camerons contact GrahamBalchin@cartercamerons.com or 020 7406 1040. At Dowse & Co contact mh@dowse.co.uk or 020 7254 6205.
Nearly £2bn-worth of new-build leasehold houses were sold in England and Wales last year, according to a detailed analysis of Land Registry data.
Builders traditionally sold houses as freehold, but they’ve switched to leasehold on some estates, saddling buyers with spiralling ground rents. In some cases highlighted by Money, buyers later say their homes are unsaleable.
Research by the Leasehold Knowledge Partnership reveals there were £1.9bn of new-build leasehold homes sold in 2015. So far this year the total is £775m. “As the Land Registry can take several months to record a new transaction, the 2016 data is incomplete. It should not be assumed the 2016 figure will be lower than 2015,” says Sebastian O’Kelly of LKP.
Clauses in the lease allow the freeholder to double the ground rent every decade, with it rising to £9,000 or more in some cases. Leaseholders wanting to buy the freehold find the builder has sold it on to another firm, which then seeks huge sums even though the lease may only be a few years into a 999-year term.
“The new-build leasehold houses stretch right across the country, from Penrith down to the Isle of Wight,” says O’Kelly. “Several areas of Wales are affected, with a reintroduction of leasehold houses on a scale not seen since mine owners began building tied accommodation in the Valleys. A disproportionate amount seems to be in the north-west and in poorer areas.” However, there are also smatterings of new leasehold house sales in the south-east and south-west, with heavy concentrations in Thurrock and Peterborough. So far, the most expensive new-build leasehold house sold this year was in Hammersmith for £3.3m.
Smart televisions are hugely popular among TV viewers, allowing them to watch catch-up and other on-demand programmes, usually via an app, by connecting to the internet. They replace the need to use a computer or tablet, or other devices such as Google Chromecast.
But it has emerged that Samsung has been offering smart TVs without the necessary software in place, meaning owners are missing out on the use of some apps – and the problem goes back as far as 2015.
Charlie Thomas from Hastings is the latest buyer to complain that his new smart television won’t do what it promised. He bought a 32-inch Samsung model from his local Currys PC World in August, only to find that it didn’t have the promised iPlayer app. Initially he was able to access catch-up programmes via the TV’s web browser, but a month or so later he says that stopped working too. When he and his family tried to watch iPlayer there appeared a message saying “Device not supported”. His attempts to get Currys and then Samsung to deal with matter – either to reimburse or supply a TV that works – drew a blanks.
Thomas is just the latest buyer to discover that the Korean firm sells TVs that do not have the relevant BBC licence to allow them to operate iPlayer, or other popular apps. Buyers started complaining about this issue in 2015, asking why the manufacturer was launching TVs that don’t work as described. Software upgrades usually resolve the problem, but often after a wait of several months.
Another Money reader, Graham House, contacted us this week to say he has suffered the same problem after buying a £500 Samsung TV from Tesco.
Samsung has admitted that three of the 12 ranges of televisions it has launched this year do not have a working iPlayer app. It declined to say how many individual sets are affected, but it is likely to be at least 18 models. A spokesman claimed the problem affects all TV manufacturers equally, and that a solution is “imminent”, although he could not give an exact date.
The BBC, which licences the iPlayer app, says it will start working on Thomas’s Samsung TV soon. It added that iPlayer is now available on more than 10,000 devices. In a statement it said: “Unfortunately, Samsung was late in submitting the request for this device to be certified for BBC iPlayer. We work closely with all manufacturers to ensure BBC iPlayer is on as many of their devices as possible.”
Meanwhile, Thomas says the whole matter has left him very frustrated. “It was particularly important to me that I could watch BBC catch-up on this TV, and it seemed clear to me that I would be able to get a replacement under the terms of the Consumer Rights Act 2015.
“A smart TV is not very smart if it can’t access iPlayer, so I returned to the store. Currys refused to accept it back, and told me to phone Samsung technical support. Samsung, in a long and extremely frustrating phone call, is adamant there is nothing wrong with the TV and has refused to supply the ticket that allows the store to replace it. It did admit it had a licensing issue with the BBC for this range of TVs, which it is addressing, starting with the bigger models, but with no indication of time-frame. I’ve already waited two months and am not prepared to wait any longer for something that isn’t my problem.”
Following Money’s intervention – and threats from Thomas to take the matter to the small claims court – Currys has sent him a voucher for a plug-in Amazon Firestick that allows him to access iPlayer and other catch-up services. It has blamed the manufacturer for the problems, even though the Consumer Rights Act makes the retailer responsible for what it sells.
Samsung told us: “The Samsung Smart TV platform is used by content providers to make apps available. Content providers may remove apps from the platform or stop supporting them at any time. When new Samsung Smart TV products are launched, there may be a delay before the apps shown become available on those products.”
Wednesday’s autumn statement will be the first test of new chancellor Philip Hammond. Will he, as Theresa May promised in her speech on becoming prime minister, “make Britain a country that works for everyone”. Or will he listen instead to a vociferous campaign on the front pages of the Daily Telegraph, demanding tax cuts for people who can afford to buy £1m houses?
The nub of the Telegraph campaign is that stamp duty charges for homebuyers are too high. They label it a “punitive tax” which has resulted in a fall in house sales and a painful cut in income for removal firms and home renovators, indirectly resulting in the loss of 14,000 jobs. What’s more, it contends that the Exchequer has received £370m less in stamp duty than it expected when George Osborne upped the rates.
But just how punitive is stamp duty in reality? The average house price in the UK is £218,000, according to the latest Office for National Statistics data. Pay that today for a home and the stamp duty will be £1,860 (we have a good calculator on our website). Few people relish paying stamp duty when they are putting down a large deposit, paying solicitors’ fees and watching money slip through their fingers. But that £1,860 figure represents just 0.9% of the purchase price. In France, the rate for the overwhelming majority of properties is 5.8%. In Spain, stamp duty is generally 7%. In Australia it’s state by state, but in New South Wales the equivalent £218,000 home would attract stamp duty of 3.2%. Our average property rate only looks pricey compared to Ireland, where most properties are taxed at 1%, and the US, where stamp duty isn’t levied and where total “closing costs” for buyers are generally lower than the UK.
As for the impact on the amount of tax brought into HMRC’s coffers, figures from September show that outside London, the new rates reduced the amount collected on home sales. HMRC said the number of transactions increased across all regions, but in parts of the country stamp duty receipts fell by up to 21%.
So what explains the burning anger over the issue? There’s one place where stamp duty really has soared: London. In particular, those parts of London with fancy property prices and where £1m-plus sales are not uncommon. Maybe the sorts of places where newspaper bosses live.
The new stamp duty regime rises steeply on higher-priced properties. A buyer of a £400,000 home must pay £10,000 in tax, an effective rate of 2.5%. On an £800,000 property it is £30,000, or 3.8%. Once we get to £1m the stamp duty is £43,750, or 4.4%.
There were 1,950 fewer sales in the £1m-plus bracket after the higher rates were introduced. But the idea that home renovators have lost out is fatuous. It is obvious to anyone living in London that stamp duty has driven an explosion in loft extensions. Rather than hand £50,000 to HMRC, families are opting to build in the loft instead.
When Osborne raised stamp duty, his prime objective was increasing revenue – and all of the increase has come from the capital. London buyers paid £3.4bn of the total £7.2bn collected in England (Scotland operates a different regime). But even in London the average house price is a long way short of £1m. It is £488,000 (ONS), which means the average stamp duty charge is £14,400, or 3%. That’s a lot, but French and Spanish homebuyers would regard it as a bargain.
Osborne’s secondary reason for increasing stamp duty was to dampen the housing market. When he made the announcement, the market was at its frothiest in the capital. Today the richest parts of London are enjoying a flat, if not falling, market. On that measure, the stamp duty hike has worked.
Hammond has a choice: he can do a deal for the homebuyers of Mayfair, or he can do something for middle England instead.
In the Oscar-winning The Big Short, Steve Carell plays the angry Wall Street outsider who predicts (and hugely profits from) the great financial crash of 2007-08. He sees sub-prime mortgages rated triple-A but which, in reality, are junk – and bets billions against the banks holding them. In real life he is Steve Eisman, he is still on Wall Street, and he is still shorting stocks he thinks are going to plummet. And while he’s tight-lipped about which ones (unless you have $1m to spare for him to manage) it is evident he has one major target in mind: continental Europe’s banks – and Italy’s are probably the worst.
Why Italy? Because, he says, the banks there are stuffed with “non-performing loans” (NPLs). That’s jargon for loans handed out to companies and households where the borrower has fallen behind with repayments, or is barely paying at all. But the Italian banks have not written off these loans as duds, he says. Instead, billions upon billions are still on the books, written down as worth about 45% to 50% of their original value.
The big problem, says Eisman, is that they are not worth anywhere near that much. In The Big Short, Eisman’s staff head to Florida to speak to the owners of newly built homes bundled up in “mortgage-backed securities” rated as AAA by the investment banks. What they find are strippers with loans against multiple homes but almost no income, the mortgages arranged by sharp-suited brokers who know they won’t be repaid, and don’t care. Visiting the housing estates that these triple-A mortgages are secured against, they find foreclosures and dereliction.
In a mix of moral outrage at the banks – and investing acumen – Eisman and his colleagues bought as many “swaps” as possible to profit from the inevitable collapse of the mortgage-backed securities, making a $1bn profit along the way.
This time around, Eisman is not padding around the plains of Lombardy because he says the evidence is in plain sight. When financiers look to buy the NPLs off the Italian banks, they value the loans at what they are really worth – in other words, how many of the holders are really able to repay, and how much money will be recovered. What they find is that the NPLs should be valued at just 20% of their original price. Trouble is, if the Italian banks recognise their loans at their true value, it wipes out their capital, and they go bust overnight.
“Europe is screwed. You guys are still screwed,” says Eisman. “In the Italian system, the banks say they are worth 45-50 cents in the dollar. But the bid price is 20 cents. If they were to mark them down, they would be insolvent.”
Eisman is careful not to name any specific Italian bank. But fears about the solvency of the system – weighed down by an estimated €360bn in bad debts – are not new. In official “stress tests” of 51 major European banks in July by the European Banking Authority, Italy’s third largest bank, Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, emerged as the weakest. It triggered a rescue package – and soothing words from Italy’s finance minister, who said there was no generalised crisis in the banking system. But MPPS’s share price remains at just 25 cents, down more than 90% from two years ago.
How worried should British bank account (and shareholders) be? “I’m not really worried about England’s banks,” says Eisman. “They are in better shape than most in Europe.” When it comes to the US, Eisman’s outrage, so central to the plot of The Big Short, has melted away (just don’t start him on Household Finance Corporation, the HSBC-owned lender at the heart of sub-prime crisis). “I think the regulators did a horrendous, just horrendous job pre-crisis. But under the Fed, the banks have been enormously deleveraged and de-risked. There are no sub-prime mortgages any more... the European regulators have been much more lenient than the US regulators.”
Eisman was of the view that US banks were rather boring as an investment – although Donald Trump’s victory has changed that. “I have a feeling there could be a softening in the Department of Labor rules (an Obama-led crackdown on how banks sell financial products) and the regulatory environment has now changed in favour of the banks.”
Trump’s victory has sent the bond markets into disarray, with the yield on government bonds rising steeply. While this sounds good for savers – interest rates could rise – it is bad news for the holders of government bonds, which fall in value when the yield rises. Eisman sees that as another woe for Europe’s banks, who hold vast amounts of “sovereign bonds”.
“What is very negative is that in every country in Europe, the largest owner of that country’s sovereign bonds are that country’s banks,” he says. As the bonds decline in value, then the capital base of the banks deteriorates.
He doesn’t share the optimism around Deutsche Bank since Trump’s victory. The troubled German bank, facing a $14bn fine in the US for mortgage bond mis-selling, was for a long time one of the biggest lenders to the Trump business empire. In the three days after Trump’s victory, shares in Deutsche Bank, regarded as Europe’s most systemically important bank, jumped by a fifth from €12.90 to €15.30 as traders bet on Trump-inspired leniency over the fine.
But Eisman doesn’t buy it. By his reckoning, Deutsche Bank was less fundamentally profitable than its rivals, and relied more on leverage to boost earnings. His analysis suggests it will struggle to return to its former profitability.
Critics will point out that shorting the likes of Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena or Deutsche Bank sounds fine – except that the share price of both have already fallen so dramatically the bad news is already in the price. But we don’t know for sure if they are Eisman’s precise targets – because he’s not willing to say unless you give him at least $1m to manage in one of his “personal accounts”.
Eisman now effectively runs his own “boutique” operation within a bigger Wall Street firm, Neuberger Berman. His “Eisman Long/Short SMA” account has opened to wealthy investors, and in January he will be in London drumming up interest among investors.
But not everything Eisman touches turns to gold. He declines to say how much he made during the financial crash, when he was manager of funds at FrontPoint Financial Services, though it was reportedly as much as $1bn. But in 2010 FrontPoint ran into trouble after one of its manager pleaded guilty to insider trading and was given a five-year prison sentence.
Eisman later set up a hedge fund, Emrys Partners, gathering nearly $200m from investors, but its returns were relatively humdrum compared to the drama of the great crash, making 3.6% in 2012 and 10.8% in 2013, according to the Wall Street Journal.
Did he think the film accurately portrayed what went on? He visited the set, and gave Carell and the other actors (Brad Pitt and Christian Bale also starred) advice and notes.
“When I saw the film, I thought it was great and that Steve Carell was wonderful. But I thought, hey, I wasn’t that angry. After the crash I was interviewed by the Federal Crisis Inquiry Commission, and I saw a transcription later on. After reading it, I realised that ‘yes’, I really was that angry... but the Fed has done a very good job since.”
My boss doesn’t like me. I’m not sure why and have given up trying to figure it out, but it’s making my working life miserable. She undermines me in front of the rest of the team, interrupts with irrelevant asides when I’m trying to lead meetings, leaves me out of meetings I should be included in, and makes threats that I might lose my job or someone else more junior might lose theirs if I don’t do some often irrelevant task.
I am desperate to leave but feel so undermined by her bullying, favouritism and passive aggressive behaviour that I feel worthless, useless and unemployable. She likes to remind me that I am lucky to have a job. I have worked here for 15 years but now feel trapped in a vicious circle. What should I do?
You don’t know why your boss doesn’t like you – and I’d be fairly certain she doesn’t either. She’s a bully, and bullies are irrational, unhappy creatures who derive strange pleasure from humiliating others, particularly in front of an audience. Some bullies achieve their ascendancy through force of personality. Your boss does it by abusing her seniority. In saying this, I’m not asking you to understand her, let alone forgive her; I’m saying something more important.
It’s the ultimate aim of bullies to intimidate their victims to such an extent that they begin to believe they somehow deserve to be bullied, that they are inferior, worthless beings – and that’s exactly what’s happening to you. You say you feel worthless, useless and unemployable, and yet you must know you’re none of those things. In the 15 years you’ve worked in this place – presumably before the arrival of this monster – you will have been a confident, competent, contented person. That is, at heart, who you still are – so you must fight very hard not to succumb. If she senses you have, it will give her still further pleasure and she’ll even see it as in some way justifying her behaviour.
I would hope that those in authority will soon recognise the malign influence this person is having and will take steps to remove her. But you can’t wait for that. You need to be deliberately, consciously defiant. Defy your boss by looking at yourself in the mirror and promising yourself that you won’t let her win. Then with all the old confidence that you can muster, go out there and find yourself another job.
• Keep a detailed log of all incidents, and keep all relevant documents, even post-it notes. My lawyer advised me this when I was in a similar situation. It didn’t stop me from having to leave, but I got a much better deal because I had proof of everything. Aranzazu
• The only solution is to get out – sad and unfair, but sometimes life is like that. But you can look for other jobs up hill and down dale with no time pressure. As an aside, once you start looking you will probably find the stress flows away – you will have control of the situation. CaptainGrey
• I was in this situation with a boss who continually described me as “difficult to like”, “a cold person”, “impossible to get along with”, and I really sympathise. In the end, feeling I was on the verge of a nervous breakdown, I simply quit. I didn’t have anything to go to but felt I had to for the sake of my health. I had savings I could live on for six months (with big lifestyle changes), a plan for low-paid work if I couldn’t find something else, and an alternative plan for retraining in the longer term. The day I walked out was one of the happiest of my life – the relief was incredible and I felt much better about myself almost immediately. In the end I got a job within a month. It’s only in hindsight that I recognise just what a bad mental state I’d got myself into, and I dread to think of the damage if I had stayed. I know it is a risk, and for some is financially impossible, but if there is any way at all you can do it, then get out. room32
• Join a union if you haven’t already, and wait until you are entitled to representation. Keep a log, including details of possible witnesses. With the help of your union, submit a grievance detailing what you are complaining about and what you would like your employer to do about it. intermax
I have recently been promoted to team leader– the second rung of the in-house managerial ladder. I had been working towards this for a year before I finally got my opportunity – it’s on secondment for two months and will get made permanent if it goes well.
I explained in my interview that although I have a basic knowledge of the in-house computer systems, I don’t have the knowledge that the other team leader or the manager has. Since I have been promoted I have had to text or ring one of them each shift in order for help. I explained that I wanted training and needed it to be able to do my job, but have been told it’s going to be difficult to find the time. Now things are going wrong and I am unable to fix them. There have been occasions where they haven’t answered the phone and I’ve been completely stuck, and been reprimanded for it on the next shift.
If this continues I can’t see the secondment being made permanent, from either side, as I don’t want to take the job permanently if this is what is to come.
I suspect you’re being just a little too polite and hesitant. Because you don’t want to make a fuss or seem to be looking for excuses when things go wrong, you haven’t been nearly firm enough in your request for training. This could lead to exactly the outcome you fear, with your secondment failing to be made permanent and you, rather than your workplace, being held responsible. You might, as you suggest, be relieved – but that would be unfair and unnecessary.
You need to write a cool, considered note to your manager, copied to HR (if you have such a department). Avoid sounding either plaintive or apologetic; stick strictly to the facts. Say that you are grateful to both your manager and the other team leader for the time they spend helping you deal with in-house system issues. Now that you’ve been doing the job for some time it’s become even more apparent that you shouldn’t have to rely on such ad hoc help but need formal computer system training. Can they please arrange a programme for you as soon as possible, because only then will you feel able to fulfil the role with which you’ve been entrusted.
This will hopefully prompt the training you need. At worst, being on the record when your performance is eventually evaluated, it should ensure you’re not unfairly penalised.
• Cover your back: write a report to your manager requesting a specialised minion on short-contract, adding that training would be cheaper. And bite the bullet and self-study and network like crazy. RodMcLeod
• Pick up the phone and talk to IT guys, experts on connecting systems, your own staff. People are usually happy to help as long you show that you’re looking to develop your own knowledge rather than simply asking them to solve your problems for you. Sandeman83
• Aside from in-house documentation, one can often find other IT documentation, examples and user forums online. You can also ask the IT people if they have any documentation – often they have put considerable effort into it, which can often go largely unused. This will not only help you to do your job, but help you if/when you look for another. jgbg
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
A ban on cold calling to sell pension products will be introduced in next week’s autumn statement, after changes brought in by former chancellor George Osborne led to a surge in scammers tricking people out of their retirement savings.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, will use his first budget statement to announce the new rules, with the intention of ending approximately 250m scam calls a year leading to pensions fraud of almost £19m in 2015.
There has been a surge of fraudulent cold calling targeting pensioners since Osborne’s reforms of the pension system to make it easier for people to withdraw sums without penalty.
The scams tend to be presented as unique investment opportunities, such as putting your pension pot into a new hotel in an exotic location or supposedly ethical projects that promise huge returns.
Under the changes due to be announced by Hammond, all calls relating to pension investments where a business has no existing relationship with the individual will be forbidden. Similar rules already cover cold calls relating to mortgages.
Companies flouting the ban could face fines of up to £500,000 from the information commissioner, although the watchdog does not have powers to tackle firms operating outside the UK.
Pension firms will be given more powers to block suspicious transfers, preventing people’s life savings from being transferred without any checks. The rules will also stop small self-administered schemes from being set up using a dormant company as the sponsoring employer.
Some research has suggested that scammers could be behind as many as one in 10 pension transfer requests.
Hammond appears to be acting after a petition signed by thousands of people, including former pensions ministers Ros Altmann and Steve Webb, Martin Lewis of the website Money Saving Expert, and a number of independent financial advisers, requested pension cold calling be made illegal.
Michelle Cracknell, head of the government’s Pensions Advisory Service helpline, also called for a ban, saying every customer should refuse to take pension cold calls.
If you’re after a rural retreat with period charm, look no further than these properties from Northumberland to Devon
Once a corn mill, the wheel and workings survive in two of the rooms and the sitting room overlooks the mill pond. Four of the five bedrooms are en suites and you have fishing rights on the river bank. The three top-floor bedrooms are all reached by separate staircases and can’t be accessed from each other. Guide price: £550,000. Savills , 01392 455 700
Felicity Lawrence’s piece (Trump is right: Nafta is a disaster. But US workers aren’t the big losers, 18 November) chimes with my experiences from the mid-1980s. My company, IBM, produced PCs in state-of-the-art plants in Greenock and Havant, for which it won export awards and its chair got a knighthood. Then, on a globalisation tide, both UK plants were shut, well-paid workers lost their jobs and manufacturing was moved, for cheaper labour, to Mexico – where, typically, plants were not owned by IBM but by sub-contractors which managed employees. These enforced 28-day contracts, regular physical tests, such as strip-searches, and medical tests (including pregnancy tests for women). Tattooed and long-haired applicants for jobs were rejected. Because holidays were conditional on one year’s service, nobody got any: one man was fired for asking for just one day off. Initially, pay was £70 a week, enough to live on, but it fell to half that.
After leaving IBM I worked on a successful campaign to get IBM, Dell and HP to accept proper conditions for their sub-contracted workers. But then manufacture moved to China, where wages were even lower. As Lawrence says, Nafta, Ceta and TTIP all give more power and money to big business. They should be scrapped.
David Murray
Wallington, Surrey
• Both the government and society are responsible for our move to the “new world of work” (Special report series since 16 November). Ask any delivery driver who comes to your door from Hermes or similar, and you will be told of the appalling conditions of their work. This need not have happened. These companies are in competition with Royal Mail/Parcel Force, and protection against unfair practices should have been given when the market was deregulated. But if every reader of the Guardian complains to their supplier when a product is delivered by one of these organisations, we might just start to change attitudes.
David Becket
Newcastle under Lyme, Staffordshire
• Unemployment as officially measured may have dropped (Unemployment falls to 11-year low, 17 November) but let’s be clear: people count as employed if they do paid work just one hour a week or if they are self-employed. It would be interesting to know whether employment measured as total hours worked by the workforce has gone up – and then whether most of that is accounted for by the growth of the workforce. There are lies, damned lies and government statistics.
Dr Brian Curwain
Christchurch, Dorset
• I am self-employed: I set my own charge rates, I decide when, where and for whom I work, and I make my own arrangements with HMRC. I am perfectly content with my income. People working for Uber, Deliveroo et al are freelance workers, not self-employed. There is a significant difference. While I have no doubt that these employers are exploiting the vulnerability of their employees, I also suspect that they never expected anyone to rely on taxi or delivery work alone as a source of income, rather than as an intermittent arrangement as and when circumstances allowed.
Michael Heaton
Warminster, Wiltshire
• Over the past 30 years or so there has been a concerted effort by the media, industry and government to change our vocabulary about industrial relations. When I was a shop steward in local government in the early 1990s, we lost personnel departments, to be replaced by human resources departments with their desensitising language. We no longer had redundancies or privatisation, but instead had downsizing and outsourcing. They mean exactly the same things, of course, but, accompanied by the Thatcher anti-trade union legislation, the change of language certainly did dampen people’s enthusiasm for any kind of industrial action.
Fast forward to the present day, and we now have the “gig economy”, all part of the economic miracle of the Conservative government. The word gig suggests something vibrant or youthful, with its links to live music and computers. The reality is totally different. The gig economy stands for zero hours contracts, no holiday pay, no pension rights, no sick pay. Yet all media outlets use the term freely. Can we make a start at claiming back our language please – starting with the Guardian not using the term gig economy any more but instead choosing something like “sweat-shop economy”? Anyone in such a jobs can relate to that, as can the wider public?
John Holroyd
Thornhill, Dumfries
• Given the changes in the economy, shouldn’t the statistics showing the welcome fall in the number of the unemployed also reveal the number of the under-employed?
Jeremy Beecham
Labour, House of Lords
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
What’s going for it? Harringay was my introduction to London. It was an inauspicious start. I was hoping for Mayfair, or Islington, at a push. (What can I say? I was young and foolish.) I’d never live here, past Finsbury Park? But here I lived in a £60-a-week room on Hermitage Road. It had a carpeted toilet mat around the loo. Still, Harringay won me over. It was the cabbages that did it; those, the running track at Finsbury Park and regular baklavas. Green Lanes, its high street, is lined with incredible Turkish grocers selling cabbages the size of rugby balls and sweet treats that kept me going during the gruelling times, like when our flatmate moved in (Charles couldn’t afford an actual room, so slept in the living room on a timeshare basis). How London has changed. Two decades on, I couldn’t afford Harringay. It’s up and come, too far for me, though you could have a try. Its town houses are “sought-after”; the word “artisan” has been spotted. But those cabbages are still there.
The case against Getting pricey. But isn’t everywhere in London?
Well connected? Trains: Turnpike Lane and Manor House are on the Piccadilly line, 15-25 mins to central London; Harringay Green Lanes is on the Overground Gospel Oak to Barking Line, currently closed for work until February 2017; Harringay rail station runs to Moorgate (16 mins) or Welwyn Garden City (35 mins). Driving: you’re not far from the North Circular, but it’s at least 40 minutes into central London, the same to the M1, and 30 mins to the M25, all with the wind behind you.
Schools Primaries: Chestnuts, St Mary’s Priory RC, North Harringay and South Harringay are all “good”, says Ofsted, with Woodberry Down “outstanding”. Secondaries: Skinners’ Academy and Park View are “good”.
Hang out at… The magnificent Salisbury pub; one of north London’s glories when it opened in 1899 and still glorious. You won’t want for Turkish grills.
Where to buy Harringay is quite small, hugging Green Lanes. The “Ladder” to the west is the estate agents’ prize, parallel streets of late Victorian and early Edwardian terraces. Terraces: five bedrooms, £900,000-£1m; four beds, £750,000-£950,000; three beds, £660,000-£875,000. Flats: three beds, £450,000-£650,000; two beds, £400,000-£575,000; one bed, £340,000-£480,000. Rentals: one-bed flat, £1,000-£1,400pcm; three-bed flat, £1,800-£2,600pcm.
Bargain of the week A three-bed terrace, needing updating, east of Green Lanes, £509,950 with paulsimonsales.com.
Kevin O’Sullivan “The area has a magic, slightly unkempt feel, and wonderful food from all parts.”
Linda Zubairi “Feels like a village, people really do know each other. You hit a pram every 100m!”
Hugh Flouch “Railway Fields and the New River Path are hidden gems.”
• Live in Harringay? Join the debate below.
Do you live in Fishguard, Pembrokeshire? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by Tuesday 22 November.
I was once a stay-at-home mum, and I hated it. Anathema as this might be to most, I think it’s something few women are willing to utter aloud, for fear of public condemnation.
When you grow up in a society that rhapsodises about the joys and wonderment of motherhood to you from the day dot, it can be an especially crushing realisation that it’s not your path. I spent years hauling around maternal guilt. I thought I’d reached the nadir of parenthood when I admitted to myself I felt stifled by giving up work.
Today, many years after returning to work full-time, that shame has long abated. And despite the inherent complications of interweaving familial duty with a professional life, I wouldn’t change it. A typical day involves running from the office to the childminder and then home, cooking supper and baking Children In Need cakes, while still in my coat and wellies. It’s not the shape of motherhood society prepared me for, but it is a reality for many working mothers, and it can be just as satisfying as the one we’re traditionally sold.
Finally, a report has been published that seems to counter the rhetoric about selfless motherhood. Research by Oxford University’s Dr Laurence Roope suggests that children of working parents develop faster than those of stay-at-home parents. While it’s important not to draw concrete conclusions from one study, this is a much-needed challenge to the one-dimensional view of hierarchical motherhood that is upheld.
Working and stay-at-home motherhood so often exist in discussion as extremes, conflating biological and social ideas, and valuing one above the other. There is little discussion of the overlap, or of the fluid nature of mothering identity, which is dictated by choice or circumstance over the course of a woman’s life. These ideologies are presented as a false binary. It’s OK to choose one and change your mind – in either direction. But what you might want to do today, or what is a reality for your family, could change tomorrow. Dismantling this outdated view of motherhood is necessary to release the guilt from these decisions.
For many women, motherhood is not the zenith of existence. It can be, if that is what you want to centre your life around, but extract individual motivation and motherhood is but one facet of being a person. We’re not one-dimensional. We’re complex wholes made up of competing, evolving identities.
I grew up in a family where my mother stayed at home for a while and then returned to work. In the late 80s and the 90s, I was fully exposed to the stereotype of the selfish working mum. We’re all familiar with the imagined privations of the working family. But it’s not the reality. We’re not facing societal meltdown over love-starved children, emotionally stymied thanks to missed parental playdough and finger-painting sessions. My wonderful childminder is far better at those things than me, and letting go of that corner of my children’s upbringing has been cathartic. Yes, my role is as mother, but in our house that means arbiter, decision-maker, breadwinner, leader.
Work has given me a focus that staying home did not. It has also given me skills and a framework for running a house and a family on my own. Some may balk at this, but I run my family like I run my team at work – with goals, with purpose, with support, with strategic intent and a blend of democratic and collaborative decision-making. I would not have those skills to apply to the chaos of child-rearing if it wasn’t for working.
Work has also been a leveller in our house. We all have a multitude of coexisting needs, both met and unmet at any moment. One wants her hair braided but I have a report to write. I want to make an early meeting, but there’s an important assembly. My children are being raised by a person with flaws and who isn’t 100% theirs. They’ve learned the value of compromise and empathy. They understand they are a component part of a greater whole, rather than the nucleus of our world. Work works for us.
We can’t tell girls they can do whatever they want, and only amplify the virtues of one type of parenting. They deserve honesty and support mechanisms that help them into work, like progressive childcare and equal paternity leave. And we can’t fully unshackle ourselves from the domestic expectations of our gender without a government that understands and responds to the barriers women face.
With more than a third of local authorities in England saying they don’t have enough nursery places, meeting the demand so often comes back to women – grandmothers, aunts, sisters, friends. The government must step up to meet the demands of modern motherhood that so often relies on childcare.
Until that happens, do not accept the fate of your biology. Do not accept you’re wrong or unnatural because you want to work. We need to demonstrate what a valuable contribution a full enfranchised female workforce can offer. The kids will be alright whatever you choose if your heart is in it – and so will you.
SSE, one of Britain’s “big six” energy suppliers, has frozen its standard prices this winter, putting pressure on its rivals to do the same.
British wholesale gas and electricity prices have risen about 30% and 40% respectively since June, along with a bounceback in other commodities such as coal, leading to speculation that some electricity suppliers could raise prices.
“We understand that the prospect of increasing bills during the colder months is a real concern for customers, particularly as they start to turn up the heating,” Will Morris, SSE’s managing director of retail, said.
The company said prices would not rise until April 2017 at the earliest.
The move puts pressure on rivals Iberdrola’s Scottish Power, Centrica’s British Gas, RWE’s npower, EON and EDF Energy to do the same.
Energy bills have doubled in Britain over the past decade to about £1,200 a year, and the government has said it could intervene in the market if it believes prices are too high.
Commenting on today’s SSE price freeze, Stephen Murray, energy expert at MoneySuperMarket, said: “This is good news but customers shouldn’t be lulled into a false sense of security. Customers who are on a big six standard tariff are still paying £200 per year more than the cheapest tariffs on the market, many of which are fixed for one year or more. ”
The sale of Staples has taken the number of UK retail jobs affected by business failures this year to almost 26,000 – the highest figure since 2012 when the sector was still reeling from the recession.
With six weeks of 2016 remaining, 22 medium and large retailers employing 25,933 people have failed, according to the Centre for Retail Research (CRR). The number of jobs affected is almost four times the 6,845 for all of last year and exceeds the 25,140 total for 2013.
The CRR figures do not take into account businesses that fail but are then revived under new owners. The numbers also exclude job cuts by companies that are still trading, including Tesco and Marks & Spencer, which is cutting up to 500 head office jobs and closing stores.
Staples, the struggling US stationery chain, has sold its UK business to Hilco Capital for a nominal sum. Hilco, the retail restructuring firm which revived HMV, will take on Staples’s 106 stores, which employ more than 1,100 people.
The stores will remain open while Hilco decides what to do with the business, though the Staples brand will be phased out in the next six months.
Staples is the latest familiar retail name to face difficulties this year, after the collapse of BHS and Austin Reed, as well as the planned closure of US retailers American Apparel and Banana Republic’s UK stores. Exhibit, a fashion chain in Northern Ireland employing 100 staff, went into administration last month after 33 years.
Professor Joshua Bamfield, director of the CRR, said the rate of failure was alarming because the economy had been growing for the past few years and businesses shutting now had made it through the recession, which was meant to have cleared out redundant or inefficient operators.
He said CRR had added almost 1,500 jobs to the 2016 running total since the end of October and that this was worrying so close to Christmas, the peak trading period for most retailers.
“Though there are fewer companies failing than a few years ago the impact is a lot bigger because the chains that are going have managed to survive since the recession. Many of them are quite large or they are people who, after years of clinging on for dear life, are saying it’s not worth bothering any more.
“People closing before Christmas is also a really bad sign because Christmas is where you make your profits so if you’re saying it’s not worth carrying on for a couple of months that is a bad signal.”
High streets face multiple pressures as consumers buy more goods online and shift their often diminished spending power from physical goods to leisure activity such as eating out and holidays. High business rates and other costs, which have risen faster than spending, have made matters worse.
Bamfield said: “This is the biggest change we have seen in retail in such a short period of time.”
The worst year for retailers in the past decade was 2008, when 54 companies, including Woolworths, failed affecting almost 75,000 jobs. Retail jobs affected by business failures fell to fewer than 11,000 in 2010 but rose again to more than 48,000 in 2012 before easing as the economy picked up.
Spoiler alert: this article, out of necessity, refers to the plot of I, Daniel Blake frequently.
Ken Loach’s brilliant film, I, Daniel Blake, is a highly realistic portrayal of many of the problems with the UK benefits system. We at the Zacchaeus 2000 Trust (Z2K) – a charity addressing poverty issues caused by unfairness in the law, legal and benefits system – were deeply moved by how it showed the day-to-day reality of poverty and trying to access welfare benefit.
Both of the main characters, Daniel and Katie, are typical of the kind of clients we help with welfare benefits and housing issues. The benefits system is complicated and, to borrow a line from the film, “a monumental farce”, so it’s no wonder people can feel reluctant to seek advice.
This is an attempt to show the kind of guidance we would give them, if they were experiencing any of the issues that arise in the film.
We first meet Daniel attending a work capability assessment. It is quickly established that he suffered a heart attack at work and has recently claimed employment and support allowance (ESA), which is an income replacement benefit for those too unwell or disabled to work, or look for work.
If you are facing a work capability assessment, if at all possible, take someone with you (which you are allowed to do), and get them to take notes. If nothing else, having someone you know there will make the ordeal less stressful; in our experience this can make a huge difference to the quality of the assessment and the outcome.
If you are deemed fit for work, and you think this decision is wrong for whatever reason, we would advise you not to feel too discouraged and not to give up. There is an enormous discrepancy between the quality of the initial decision and the final outcome of an appeal. The statistics show that roughly 60% of appeals against a “fit to work” decision are successful.
In need of money and unable to work, Daniel claims jobseeker’s allowance (JSA) while he is waiting for the mandatory reconsideration notice about his ESA claim. The “reconsideration stage” is an internal review whereby the Department for Work and Pensions will look at a decision again, but the system is undermined by the incredibly poor quality of decisions made at the reconsideration stage. One cannot help but suspect that the process is just a delaying tactic designed to put claimants off appealing.
The jobcentre should be making reasonable adjustments for anyone with medical needs claiming JSA, but in our experience it is a luck-of-the-draw system. If your jobcentre has failed to take into account your needs and make reasonable adjustments for you, or has mistreated you, you should consider making a complaint.
While claiming JSA, Daniel is told by his work coach that he has to attend a CV workshop, and that if he doesn’t, he will be sanctioned. Daniel is warned that he could face a reduction or nil payment of his benefits for anything between four and 13 weeks. It is possible to apply for hardship payments during the sanction period to make up for the reduction in your income. Sanctions can, and should be, appealed against (following a reconsideration).
Daniel mentions that he is having to deal with bedroom tax. From this we can infer that he receives housing benefit. This is paid by local authorities, and it is not uncommon for them to suspend or even terminate housing benefit payments when someone who had previously been receiving ESA has their benefit has stopped. It is therefore crucial that you keep your local authority informed if something happens with your ESA or JSA claim.
As for the bedroom tax, it is not made clear in the film why Daniel would have had a spare room; it is possible that he could have needed it for his late wife, who had medical issues of her own. If this was the case, Daniel would have had a one-year grace period following her death. After that Daniel could consider applying to his local authority for a discretionary housing payment (commonly referred to as DHPs). This is essentially a grant paid by your local authority that tops up your housing benefit.
On the day of Daniel’s appeal he is shown attending a tribunal where he meets his representative. The representative tells Daniel how confident he is of having the decision finding him fit for work overturned. None of our caseworkers could guess how Daniel would have even scored 12 points after his initial assessment. In our experience, for someone like Daniel, the most likely outcome following his medical would have been 0 points. This is because the way the ESA points system works is very inflexible and generally fails to account for conditions like Daniel’s.
Daniel would therefore have been relying on regulation 29 of the ESA regulations. This regulation can be used whenever a claimant has not scored the requisite points, but there would be a substantial risk to someone’s health if they were found fit for work and is commonly applied to people with Daniel’s health problems. A useful summary of this rule is provided by the Child Poverty Action Group.
Daniel might have also sought to rely on regulation 35 in order to argue that he should be awarded ESA with the support group component. This is about a claimant’s ability to undertake “work-related activity” at their local jobcentre, which is not nearly as difficult as claiming JSA, but there is still a risk of being sanctioned. It is therefore worth trying to make this argument, particularly given the upcoming cuts in ESA for those in the work-related activity group. The support group component also exempts ESA claimants from the benefit cap.
We first encounter Katie at the jobcentre. Katie is also claiming JSA, and is told that she is likely to be sanctioned for turning up late to an appointment with a work coach.
Katie has recently arrived in Newcastle. It transpires that her son’s room in their home in London had a leak that made him unwell. When she complained to the landlord, he evicted her. Unfortunately, disrepair or not, if Katie was renting from a private landlord she was likely to have had an assured shorthold tenancy, and therefore no security of tenure. This means that provided the landlord followed all the correct procedures, Katie could have been lawfully evicted without the landlord having to provide any reason. Recent changes in the law have made it slightly harder for landlords to lawfully evict a tenant following complaints about serious disrepair. Unlawful or illegal evictions should be reported to the local council immediately.
Katie spent two years in a homeless hostel before being offered accommodation in Newcastle. It is essential that, if you are not sure what to do, ask your local authority about an offer of accommodation. Local authorities have a duty to ensure that any offers made are for accommodation that is suitable, and the location of the accommodation has to be taken into account.
The main message for anyone in Daniel or Katie’s situation is to get advice as soon as possible – and know that there is no shame in doing this. Advice agencies like ours are here to help and will treat you with respect, without passing judgment.
The first signs that the buy-to-let boom could be coming to an end have emerged in figures from the Nationwide building society, which showed that lending to landlords went into the reverse over the past six months.
Nationwide’s buy-to-let subsidiary, the Mortgage Works, lent £2.8bn in the six months to September 2016, down from £2.9bn in the same period a year earlier.
The lender cited new affordability tests brought in ahead of changes to tax relief from April next year, which have made it more difficult for potential landlords to snap up properties.
“The buy-to-let sector is going through a period of substantial change resulting from new rules on landlord taxation [and] guidance on underwriting and affordability standards,” said Nationwide chief executive Joe Garner.
Nationwide told buy-to-let borrowers in April that they could only borrow up to 75% of a property’s value, down from 80%, and that the rental income had to be at least 145% of the monthly mortgage repayment, up from 125%. In higher priced property markets, such as London, the new tests have made buy-to-let borrowing prohibitively expensive.
Santander and Barclays have already announced tougher rules on buy-to-let lending, and Lloyds Banking Group subsidiary Birmingham Midshires, the biggest lender to landlords, is to introduce new criteria for higher rate taxpayers over the next few weeks.
Nationwide said UK house prices should remain subdued over the coming year as the Brexit process unfurls, but it does not predict a fall. “A less certain economic outlook may soften demand but prices will continue to be supported by low interest rates and limited supply of new homes,” it said, predicting rises of between 3% and 6% over the next year.
The society’s underlying profits dropped significantly in the half year from £802m to £615m, a fall of 23%. It blamed a fall in net interest income, stiff competition in the mortgage market and rising costs.
Nationwide, which is a mutual and does not have to report to shareholders, said it consciously took the decision to lower profits so it could “stand by our members”.
“We are motivated by a sense of social purpose, and we exist to serve our members and the wider society,” said Garner.
The society said that in the six months to September its gross mortgage lending was up 17% to £17.5bn, with its net lending hitting a record of £6bn. It said it accounted for one-third of net lending in the UK over the past five years.
Despite record low interest rates, savers have continued to increase deposits at the society. It said member balances increased by £4.7bn, compared with £2.6bn in the same period last year, and that it pays about 0.25% more interest on average compared with rivals, worth £380m extra to customers.
New rules on seven-day switching have helped the society to challenge the traditional high street banks. Nationwide opened 377,000 new current accounts, up 36%, giving it a 15.8% market share of new account openings in the UK.
It is also trialling new branches in communities left without banking services, with a new opening in Glastonbury where screens will enable customers to talk to remotely based advisers.
Amid the widening debate over precarious working conditions for millions of people in modern Britain, the society said that apart from being one of the earliest to promise a “living wage” to all staff it is also providing a “living pension”. Staff who pay in 7% of salary into their pension will receive a 16% contribution from Nationwide. Most standard pension schemes offer a basic company contribution of about 6% of salary.
Research from American Express has found the UK’s dog owners spend an average of £1,252 on their pets every year. More than a quarter (26%) say they spend more money on their pets now than they did five years ago. Much of that money goes to independent small businesses, with owners pointing to the quality and personalisation of service as the main benefits
Fund management firms are facing a shakeup after the City regulator published a hard-hitting critique of the “sustained, high profits” the industry has earned from savers and pension funds over the years.
The major companies, which manage £7bn of assets, should charge a single fee, the Financial Conduct Authority said, so investors could see how much they were being charged. The regulator said it would also consult on the need for a competition investigation into the consultants that advise pension funds on which fund manager to select to look after their assets.
It is the first time the FCA has used its powers to suggest a recommendation to the Competition and Markets Authority. It recommended a review into the investment consultant market in which three firms, Aon Hewitt, Mercer and Wallis Towers Watson, have a 60% market share.
Much of the FCA’s year-long review was into the wider asset management industry which it found left investors unclear about the objectives of funds, and performance which was not always measured against an appropriate benchmark.
Andrew Bailey, the FCA chief executive, said: “Asset managers are responsible for the savings of millions of people in the UK, making decisions which affect their financial wellbeing both now and in the future. In today’s world of persistently low interest rates, it is vital that we do everything possible to enable people to accumulate and earn a return on their savings which can meet their lifetime needs.
“We want to see greater transparency so that investors can be clear about what they are paying and the impact charges have on their returns. We want asset managers to ensure investors receive value for money through pursuing energetically their duty to act in their customers’ best interests. The remedies that we are proposing today aim to achieve these outcomes.”
As well as suggesting an “all-in fee” so investors can see what they are paying, the FCA suggested ideas aimed at retail investors who it said needed better ways to identify which fund was right for them. Retail investors should find it easier to move into better-value funds, the FCA said.
Martin Gilbert, the chief executive of Aberdeen Asset Management, said the FCA’s report would bring a “sense of urgency, to confronting some key industry issues impacting customers”. Its shares were little changed on the stock market.
Publication of the report removed the uncertainty that had been clouding the industry for the past year while the review was under way. “Although the FCA’s findings present some serious challenges for the asset management industry, the report puts an end to a source of speculation and uncertainty that has been the leading worry for asset managers, even with Brexit,” said Owen Lysak, a senior associate at Clifford Chance.
The UK leaving the EU could have significant consequences for the asset management industry, which uses a “passport” to operate across the current 28 member states.
The fund management industry has been the subject of a number of reviews since the start of the millennium, including a 2001 review by Paul Myners – later to become Lord Myners – and one in 2012 by John Kay.
Philip Hammond is preparing to offer modest giveaways to families that are “just about managing” in next week’s autumn statement, as the cash-strapped government struggles to make good on Theresa May’s promise to improve the lives of ordinary workers.
The chancellor will be forced to reveal a grim set of economic forecasts in his first set-piece House of Commons statement, as the independent Office for Budget Responsibility makes its first projections of the impact of Brexit on growth and the public finances.
But the prime minister has asked Hammond to send a strong signal that the government will take action to help families who are “working around the clock” to make ends meet and the Treasury has been under pressure to make resources available to a group of people who have been dubbed as “just about managing” – or Jams.
Policies under consideration including freezing fuel duty for motorists, boosting support for childcare and helping low-income families to save – and Hammond will also confirm that he will meet several Conservative manifesto pledges, including increasing the tax-free personal allowance.
Whitehall insiders stressed that any giveaways announced on the 23 November would be modest. The Treasury’s dire downbeat forecasts for the impact of Brexit on the health of the economy, published during the referendum campaign, have not yet been realised – but chancellor is keen to reserve more radical measures to be used only in case a serious downturn materialises.
The Resolution Foundation thinktank has calculated that there are almost six million working households who could be described as the “just managing” – with a net income of between £12,000 and £34,000 – and that their living standards have barely risen in a decade.
Resolution’s chief economist Matthew Whittaker suggests the best way of targeting these households would be to undo planned cuts to universal credit set in motion by Hammond’s predecessor George Osborne and to suspend the four-year cash freeze in working age benefits.
Hammond is under pressure from his own backbenchers to unpick some of the planned welfare cuts, with Conservative MPs using a debate in the House of Commons on Thursday to urge the government to take action.
No MPs voted against the SNP’s backbench motion to stop the planned cuts to employment support allowance and universal credit, with 127 MPs voting in favour, though the motion is purely symbolic.
Heidi Allen, the Conservative MP who has led the charge for a rethink, said she could think of no other issue “so regretted by colleagues on my side of the House.”
“I have a guiding principle in life,” she added. “Always listen to the loudest voice in your head. I think we all know what that voice is saying. Let’s just pause these cuts. The risk of damage is high. The financial cost to pause is low. What kind of a government do we want to be?”
Labour is also seeking to increase the pressure on Hammond to reverse the cuts and take wider measures to help low income families. Frontbenchers, including Jeremy Corbyn, attended screenings of the campaigning Ken Loach film I, Daniel Blake to draw attention to the challenges of life on benefits.
Hammond will formally abandon Osborne’s tax and spending rules, which now look impossible to meet, and announce a new fiscal framework to allow infrastructure projects that boost economic growth to be excluded from future deficit targets.
Analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies recently suggested the £10.4bn surplus pencilled in for 2019-20 by the OBR was now on course to be a £14.9bn deficit, leaving a £25bn gap to fill in the government’s last year in office. The official forecasts are expected to show that the UK faces an extra deficit bill of between £50bn and £114bn over the next four years, the biggest deterioration in the public finances since 2011.
The chancellor will seek to deflect attention from the economic costs of leaving the EU, by focusing on his longer-term aspiration to make Britain the home of a hi-tech “fourth industrial revolution”.
He will promise to boost spending on hi-tech research in a bid to equip Britain’s economy for the world after Brexit. Business group the CBI, which will host a speech from May on Monday, has been urging the Treasury to boost research spending, including by doubling funding for the taxpayer-backed research agency, Innovate UK.
Tom Thackray, the CBI director for innovation, said: “This is a critical juncture for the economy and getting behind innovation will be central to the UK’s success in the years ahead, with overall R&D spending still too low.”
Hammond has repeatedly expressed concern about Britain’s poor productivity performance – the key to delivering future economic growth - and plans a battery of policies to tackle it, which include improving infrastructure and skills.
The prime minister, meanwhile, is keen to focus on the wider electorate. Last month, May told the Conservative party conference: “Our society should work for everyone, but if you can’t afford to get onto the property ladder, or your child is stuck in a bad school, it doesn’t feel like it’s working for you. Our economy should work for everyone, but if your pay has stagnated for several years in a row and fixed items of spending keep going up, it doesn’t feel like it’s working for you.”
Separately, a cross-party group of backbenchers led by Grant Shapps, and including the Labour MPs Lucy Powell and Ian Austin, called for air passenger duty to be cut by 50% in the autumn statement – and gradually reduced over time – to boost Britain’s trade performance in the wake of the Brexit vote.
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I am in the strange position of applying for a job I don’t want. I work in a tiny team in a small company that is expanding and consequently our workload has increased enormously, so a senior position has been advertised in our team. The role includes responsibilities I do not want to take on as I don’t want additional stress, but the job description also includes areas in which I am acknowledged as being the company expert. (It’s a niche industry so these skills are not directly transferable).
My boss is aware that I don’t think some aspects of the job are within my skill set, but has advised me to apply anyway. I think this is a benchmarking exercise, but I have to accept that I would not be happy if the job went to someone I felt was less qualified than me.
I don’t know how to approach the application and interview in these circumstances. How common are benchmarking interviews and what would you advise?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
 Is your living room in the shadows on a summer’s afternoon? Do the morning rays pass by your bedroom in winter? Fret not. Without rising from your pillows, you can grab the remote control and rotate your home to catch the best of the seasonal light and vary the views over your private lake. This eccentric wooden dome house in Aquitaine, France, sits umbrella-like on its three hectares of land, tactfully camouflaged among the trees. Photographs by Leggett
A group of open-government watchdog groups have come together to call on Donald Trump to place his financial and business holdings in a “true blind trust” to combat conflicts of interest between his roles as the head of the Trump Organization and as US president.
“We are writing to urge you to place all of your business assets and investments into a genuine blind trust or the equivalent,” the organizations wrote in a letter addressed to Trump. “This means that control of these assets would be transferred to an independent trustee who would sell the assets and place the proceeds in investments which do not create conflicts of interest and which are not disclosed to you.”
Trump has vowed in the past to put his holdings in a “blind trust” controlled by his children. But the Trump transition team has reportedly sought top-level security clearance for his three adult children, all of whom are employed by the Trump Organization, and his son-in-law.
“We understand that this arrangement would require you to sever your relationship with the businesses that bear your name and with which you have invested a life’s work,” the letter’s authors stated, “but whatever the personal discomfort caused, there is no acceptable alternative – and your duties to the American people now must prevail over your personal ties to the Trump Organization businesses.”
Failure to do so, the organizations warned, “will create conflicts of interest of unprecedented magnitude”, touching on issues including “tax policy, standards for government contractors, consumer protection, the functioning of the civil justice system, financial regulation, labor rights and workplace safety and health standards, and bankruptcy law”.
The letter’s signatories include the Campaign for Accountability; the Campaign Legal Center; the Center for American Progress; the Center for Media and Democracy; Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington; Common Cause; Democracy 21; former chief White House ethics lawyer Norm Eisen; Essential Information; Issue One; Thomas E Mann; OpentheGovernment.Org; Norman Ornstein; former White House ethics lawyer Richard Painter; the People for the American Way; the Project on Government Oversight; Public Citizen; and the Sunlight Foundation.
If you’re after a rural retreat with period charm, look no further than these properties from Northumberland to Devon
Inequality has been rising for a long time in advanced economies.
As long as this was only a problem for working and middle-class people, very few visionary business leaders were publicly making the case for inclusive prosperity.
But now there are signs that more leaders are beginning to understand something is wrong.
It’s a shame it took the eruptions of democratic politics in 2016 – with Brexit and the election of Donald Trump bringing huge disruption to cherished business projects like the European single market and the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership – to convince leading figures that inequality is bad. But any progress is welcome.
When even the Commonwealth Bank’s $12m man, Ian Narev, can say “income growth inside and outside Australia remains weak, so people are not feeling better off” and go on to point out this is bad for business and bad for growth – as he did in July – then things are clearly changing.
The first thing egalitarian thinkers should say to business leaders like this is simple: “Welcome on board.”
The second thing is simple too. “Can we talk about your next enterprise agreement?”
This is because businesses who support sustainable development in Australia can make a difference by supporting the sustainable development goals (SDGs) framework in a general way – or they can make a lot of difference by acting on sustainable development in a specific way: paying their workers more.
The international sustainable development framework of goals and targets is comprehensive, which is its strength and its weakness.
If business leaders are looking for good new things to do, they have a big menu to choose from. If they want an excuse to say they’re already doing something, they have a big menu to choose from as well.
So Australian thinkers and advocates have to narrow it down. What are we asking business to do?
The SDGs overwhelmingly are about things that governments need to do. So yes, we can ask business to wrap a plane or light up a building – or sponsor a conference – and this won’t hurt.
But there are goals where private companies actually need to be in the lead, where the most important decisions aren’t going to be made by presidents and prime ministers, they’re going to be made by chairs and chief executives.
The SDG 10 (reducing inequalities) is a leading example. The key point? “By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 40% of the population at a rate higher than the national average.”
We cannot lift income growth in the bottom 40% of the population without lifting wages for the people in that group who work. That is impossible.
Now Carlton & United Breweries can do something about that. So can Rio Tinto. So can Transfield. So can big supermarket chains and so can every one of the banks.
They don’t have to coordinate international action – it can start with wages in Australia. They don’t even have to sign up to a communiqué calling on government to do anything. The power is in their hands to get it done.
The report of the Chifley Research Centre’s Inclusive Prosperity Commission released in August this year found that right now, it’s not happening in Australia.
In the 70s and early 80s, wages went up faster than productivity. From the 80s to the end of the century, wages and productivity rose together. But since 2000 there has been significant “decoupling” where wages have failed to keep pace with productivity improvements.
In turn, labour’s share of national income has been declining steadily since the 80s.
The income share of the top 1% has grown in our country about as fast as in the UK and the US, although from a lower starting point. The gender pay gap may have decreased slightly but men still earn 23% more than women on average , 4% to 6% of Australia’s society continues to experience chronic poverty and deprivation, and employment growth is still very weak.
Inequality on this scale can’t be sustained. And without wage growth, no amount of redistribution through tax and transfer payments, or opportunity through investment in education and skills, can make an economy inclusive or a society fair.
There’s a role for government of course. For wages to lift for working people, the rules for negotiation need to be strong, and the voice of those people (principally through trade unions) needs to be strong.
Getting wages going up in line with productivity doesn’t have to be a war. We could work together on that.
But we cannot work together on that without an understanding from business leaders that when wages rise based on productivity, the economy as a whole benefits.
When only 10% of the people benefit if the economy is strong, then only 10% of the people will care if the economy is strong.
• Michael Cooney will be speaking on SDG10 (reduce inequalities) at the SDGA16 conference in Sydney on 29-3o November
The number of workers who commute daily for two hours or more has increased by a third in five years, a study shows, with stagnant wages and soaring housing costs blamed for pushing people further away from their jobs.
Research by the Trades Union Congress estimates that 3.7 million, or about one in seven, workers spent at least that time travelling to and from work in 2015 – an increase of 900,000 people. In 2010 just one in nine workers faced such a long commute.
The TUC believes the increase is down to people being priced out of areas close to their jobs, as well as being due to a lack of investment in roads and railways which has increased journey times on increasingly dilapidated infrastructure.
“Employers cannot turn a blind eye to this problem. More home- and flexible-working would allow people to cut their commutes and save money,” said Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC. “But if we are to reduce the pain of traffic jams and train delays, ministers need to invest more in public transport and our roads. Next week’s autumn statement is the perfect opportunity to do this.”
The TUC’s analysis is based on unpublished figures from the Office For National Statistics’ labour force survey, and covers just workers’ main jobs, excluding work done from home.
While men still account for more than three-fifths of those making long commutes, more women now are making longer journeys. The TUC’s analysis shows 35% more women spending two hours-plus on a commute than five years ago, compared to 29% of men.
The growth in long commutes to jobs in traditionally female-dominated sectors, such as education and health, and social care – up 46% and 26% respectively – could explain the narrowing gender gap, the TUC says.
However, the industry with the highest proportion of workers making long commutes was finance and insurance, with 29.3% of employees in this sector travelling more than two hours a day, followed by 28.9% of mining and quarrying workers, and 25.5% of information and communication workers.
Regionally, Northern Ireland had the biggest rise in long commuting, followed by the south-east – much of which acts as a dormitory for London’s office staff –and the West Midlands.
The research has been prepared and released to mark Work Wise UK’s Commute Smart week, an annual campaign to raise awareness of how better working practices can mitigate the effect of the winter months on people.
Phil Flaxton, chief executive of Work Wise UK, said: “Long commutes have become a part of the UK’s working culture. The excessive time spent commuting is one of the main factors contributing to work-life balance problems. Not only is the amount of time commuting an issue, the nine to five culture with its peak travel times generates congestion on railways, underground and road networks, and as a consequence increases stress for commuters.
“Clearly the government, public transport providers and employers must do more in order to address the major negative impact on the UK’s economy and lost productivity.”
Letters: Too often people find themselves in the red because of unexpected life events like the loss of a job, an illness or the breakdown of a relationship
Millions of children in the UK are living in families trapped by debt. As charities and organisations who work with, and directly support, households struggling with problem debt, we see the impact this can have on the wellbeing and mental health of parents and children alike.
Too often people find themselves in the red because of unexpected life events like the loss of a job, an illness or the breakdown of a relationship. What they need is time and space to seek advice and get their finances back on track. Instead, they can face mounting interest, fees and charges and, in some cases, repeated phone calls and visits from intimidating bailiffs, all of which make it harder for them to pay off what they owe. While some lenders already help those in a vulnerable situation, many don’t; it is too often the case that those who do not act responsibly are those who are rewarded by being paid first. We now need to ensure that all creditors, including local authorities and other public sector organisations that collect debts, follow the lead of creditors that voluntarily offer protection to those households struggling with debts.
That’s why we are calling on the government to use next week’s autumn statement to introduce a legally binding breathing space scheme. This would ensure that people struggling with debts get protection from additional fees, charges and creditor enforcement action for a temporary 12-month period to stop worsening debts and recover control of their finances. As long as a debt repayment plan is in place, we want to see these protections continue to help people repay their debts in a safe and affordable way.
The provision of such a legal protection could have a hugely beneficial impact, not just on family finances but on the futures of some of the country’s most vulnerable children. We urge ministers to act.
Matthew Reed Chief executive, The Children’s Society, Steve Johnson Chief executive, AdviceUK, Natasha Finlayson Chief executive, Become, Damon Gibbons Director, Centre for Responsible Credit, Professor Sarah Banks Centre for Social Justice and Community Action, Durham University, Matt Barlow Chief executive, Christians Against Poverty, Heather Keates Chief executive, Community Money Advice, Joanna Elson Chief executive, Money Advice Trust, Polly Mackenzie Director, Money and Mental Health Institute, Martin Lewis founder, MoneySavingExpert.com, Kim Johnson President, National Association of Head Teachers, Judith Moran Director, Quaker Social Action, Professor Neena Modi President, Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, Professor Simon Wessely President, Royal College of Psychiatrists, Mike O’Connor Chief executive, StepChange debt charity, Michelle Highman Chief executive, The Money Charity, Sarah Brennan Chief executive, Young Minds.
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
The debate around fairer pay for women feels more prominent and urgent than ever. Yet, despite this momentum, new estimates suggest the gender pay gap won’t be closed anytime soon. A new report from the World Economic Forum estimates that it will take up to 170 years for the world’s women to earn wages that are equitable to men’s.
While that’s the global picture, things aren’t much better at home in the US. According to the Institute for Women’s Policy Research, in 2015, female full-time employees earned about $0.79 for every dollar made by full-time male employees. For minorities, the data is even more disparaging: African American women earn $0.64, Native American women earn $0.59 and Latinas earn $0.54.
Now, with pressure from legislators, investors and the public sector rising, more states and companies are proactively taking strides to decrease the disparity and address these damning numbers. In August, Massachusetts passed an equal pay law, making it illegal for employees to ask potential hires about their salary histories. California also tightened up its equal pay act this year, calling for companies to look beyond job titles and ensure that men and women who do the same types of work are paid the same wage.
Earlier this year, Obama issued an executive order that will require companies with more than 100 people to report their employee salaries to the government, broken down by gender and race. And in June, the White House announced its Equal Pay Pledge, calling on American companies to commit to paying the same salaries to women and men. More than 50 major companies signed the pledge, including Apple, GM, Target and Unilever.
This is an encouraging first step. But what are businesses doing in practice to address inequalities in pay? Here, we take a look at the pay practices of four big employers to explore what could – and should – be done.
California-based Patagonia, an outdoor clothing retailer known for its activism as much as its windbreakers and fleece jackets, signed the White House pledge in August. But they’ve long had a tradition of catering to female employees, says Dean Carter, vice president of human resources and shared services. Currently, the company, which has a female CEO, Rose Marcario, has more women than men on staff – 866 v 862, respectively.
Carter attributes the company’s ability to retain female employees to its culture and generous benefits: 12 weeks of fully paid family medical leave applicable to both men and women, with no limitations on the number of times it can be used; 16 weeks fully paid maternity leave; and 12 weeks fully paid paternity leave. Patagonia also offers free on-site childcare to all staff members, both at their Ventura headquarters and their distribution warehouse in Reno.
“It’s true, there are financial costs to offering on-site child care, but the benefits – financial and otherwise – pay for themselves every year,” Marcario says. “As a CEO, it’s not even a question in my mind. Business leaders [and their chief financial officers] should take note.”
The company’s child care program began in 1983. Three decades later, the company says it actually recoups 91% of the program costs through tax benefits, employee retention and employee engagement. Patagonia also says its family-friendly policies have helped improve productivity and have resulted in more women in management positions, and it’s proud of the fact that a full 100% of new mothers return to work after taking maternity leave.
While Patagonia has been proactive about gender parity, some companies have been harder to turn around, according to Natasha Lamb, director of equity research and shareholder engagement at Arjuna Capital.
Arjuna, a Massachusetts-based wealth management company that champions social responsibility, and it invests in some of the biggest tech companies in the US, including eBay, Expedia, GoDaddy, Facebook, Alphabet, Intel, Adobe, Microsoft and Amazon. Last year, Lamb decided to take a bold public stance on the gender wage gap by filing shareholder resolutions at each of these companies, requesting that they publicly share data on the differences in pay between men and women.
The companies’ responses were mixed. For example, Intel, Apple and Microsoft agreed to share their data, revealing that male and female employees are paid the same or nearly the same wages. Google and Adobe haven’t complied, nor has Facebook, though it has said that male and female employees are paid equitably.
This was not Lamb’s first time pushing tech giants to consider equal pay for women. In 2014, she filed a first shareholder resolution to eBay requesting data on gender and pay; only 8% of shareholders voted for it. “I really expected that eBay would be more proactive and receptive and work with us. But that didn’t happen,” Lamb says.
“It was the first year a gender pay gap proposal was ever filed and ever went to a vote. As an emerging investor issue, it did not garner the support of the proxy advisory firms, which recommend how investors should cast their votes. Plus, at that point no other companies had taken any action. The Gap was the only company to claim it had no gender pay gap.”
By 2016, Lamb had filed proposals at nine big tech companies, and many of them were beginning to disclose their pay gaps and commit to closing them. “So by the spring of 2016, [investors] viewed the gender pay gap as a competitive issue critical for attracting and retaining top talent. Peers were taking action on equal pay.”
As a result, in 2016 the vote went up, with 51% of votes cast in favor of disclosing pay disparities at the company. Ebay finally released the gender and pay data in October, revealing that women earn nearly the same salaries as men in equivalent roles – they get 99.8% of what men earn, to be exact. While Lamb says few companies report complete compensation, which would include salary, bonuses, and stock grants, Ebay said that its data includes those additions.
The tech giant, which signed the White House pledge, underwent a massive audit in 2015, looking at salaries for its 17,000 employees and whether there were differences based on gender and job function. Salesforce found that 6% of its workers needed a salary adjustment, and spent nearly $3m to “eliminate statistically significant differences in pay”, which affected both men and women.
Going beyond just wage equity, Salesforce has added schools with more diverse student populations to its roster of places to recruit new employees. The company has also launched a new leadership training program for employees that it says has boosted the number of women who were promoted by 33% in the last year. As far as benefits, Salesforce has increased employee parental leave for both women and men to 12 weeks off at 80% salary, and allows them to return gradually by working reduced hours for the first four weeks at full pay.
Washington-based travel site Expedia says it strives to address diversity in the workplace beyond just looking at wage parity. The company says that it pays men and women equally for equivalent roles, including bonuses and stock-based compensation. And, 51% of Expedia’s employees in the US are women.
However, the harder task is getting women into management roles. Currently, only 33% of Expedia’s manager level and senior or executive leadership positions are held by women.
“While we compare well with many of our technology peers, we have a long way to go in bringing more female representation into leadership roles,” says Dara Khosrowshahi, president and CEO of Expedia. “We need to attract, hire, engage and promote talent of all kinds all around the world, and we believe that by enriching the diversity of workforce across all dimensions, including gender, we achieve the most enriched outcomes.”
As far as benefits, Expedia offers 12 weeks of paid parental leave for both women and men. However, Nikki Krishnamurthy, executive vice president, says that it’s hard for the company to determine what causes women to leave the company after having children. Expedia has studied retention rates across gender, finding similar rates among male and female employees. Most women, Krishnamurthy says, return after the leave, adding: “But that isn’t to say that after a year or two that they don’t make an alternative career choice.”
Conservative MPs have called on the chancellor to reconsider welfare cuts ahead of the autumn statement, after a backbench motion to pause the planned cuts passed unanimously in the House of Commons.
No MPs voted against the motion to stop the planned cuts to employment and support allowance (ESA) and universal credit, with 127 voting in favour. However, the motion is purely symbolic, intended only as a method of sending a message to government.
During the debate, called by the SNP’s Neil Gray, MPs across the house called for Philip Hammond to pause a planned £29-a-week cut to ESA, which applies to those not in employment through illness or disability but who have been judged fit to prepare to return to work.
The universal credit cuts will also mean a reduction in the amount people are able to earn before their benefits are withdrawn.
Heidi Allen, the Conservative MP who has led calls for a rethink on welfare cuts, said she could think of no other issue “so regretted by colleagues on my side of the house”.
“I have a guiding principle in life,” she went on. “Always listen to the loudest voice in your head. You might choose to ignore it, you might try and drown it out with distractions and other arguments. But you know it’s there. In fact, you can sometimes see it when you look in the mirror.
“I think we all know what that voice is saying. Let’s just pause these cuts. The £30 represents 29% of the weekly income of some half a million people. It’s big money for relatively few people. Let’s just pause. The risk of damage is high. The financial cost to pause is low. What kind of a government do we want to be?”
Peter Aldous, the Tory MP for Waveney, said he was concerned there “has not been a full and proper impact assessment of the proposed changes”.
Jeremy Lefroy, another Tory MP, spoke about his own father, a vicar, who became disabled when he was 34 but continued working until retirement with help from welfare schemes. Lefroy said he took issue with the cut, which brought down ESA to the same level as jobseekers’ allowance, because ill or disabled people preparing to return to work often had higher costs of living.
“There’s the additional costs for heating ... additional costs for food, some of the diets involved are expensive,” he said. “The cost of transport is expensive as one goes frequently to hospital and doctor’s appointments.”
The MP for Enfield Southgate, Tory David Burrowes, praised colleagues for supporting the motion but said he did not consider them “particularly brave” for speaking out on the issue. “The people who are brave in this debate, though, are those who are trying to make ends meet. They’re the brave people we care about and we have to do more for them,” he said.
The Department for Work and Pensions has pledged that a new package of support to give practical help for re-entering the workforce will be in place by the time the cuts come into force in April.
The work and pensions minister, Penny Mordaunt, replying to the debate, said: “Proof we have listened and understood will be in our actions and a person’s experience of the system and support they receive is the only thing that will assure confidence in that system.”
Speaking to the Guardian after the debate, Allen said she had detected a change of tone. “I think they are listening, and I do get the sense the door is more open than we might have thought, even if it is not a U-turn on the cut, but an extra fund to make up the difference.”
However, the DWP stressed there were no plans to unpick previously announced cuts in Hammond’s autumn statement or beyond. “Our reforms are increasing the incentives for people to move into a job rather than staying on benefits, while keeping an important safety net in place for those who are vulnerable or unable to work,” a department spokesman said.
On Wednesday, Tory MPs voted down a Labour motion to scrap the cuts. The opposition motion also called on the government to reveal its distributional analysis ahead of the autumn statement – a breakdown of how hard various income brackets are hit by spending cuts.
No figures have been published since 2015, but the motion was defeated by 24 votes.
In 2009-10, during the final year of my PhD at the University of Birmingham, a decision was made on high to close one of the flagship departments of British sociology. The rationale was that they could offer a degree in the subject without the expense of a large team of highly trained specialists. As one of the managers put it at the time “we are all social scientists”. So why invest in a department of sociology when the degree could be taught by a range of other staff?
We organised a campaign to attempt to save our department, complete with petitions, protests and placards. But we were fighting against an irrepressible force of marketisation that in hindsight we had no prospect of preventing. Eventually the decision was made to close the department, relocate the degree to the politics faculty and retain only five staff from a subject that once employed 18 people, including losing the two professors.
It is no coincidence, then, that Birmingham has been highlighted in the Guardian’s investigation into the casualisation of the higher education workforce, as the Russell Group institution with the highest amount of staff – 70% – on insecure contracts, which is part of a wider trend of market forces transforming the sector. With students paying such high fees for their education, we really need to question where this money is going.
Looking back at our campaign, one of the most important (and catchy) slogans was that we wanted support for “students, not Starbucks”. At the same time the university was slashing the teaching staff, it was investing in a multimillion-pound building project with the coffee chain as its centrepiece. As this week’s reporting reveals, Birmingham is currently undergoing £500m of building refurbishments.
It is clear that the problem of the casualisation of the workforce is not caused by a lack of money in universities but rather what is prioritised when they become a marketplace. Institutions across the country are spending millions investing in buildings, facilities and eye-wateringly expensive halls of residence. The ever-increasing pay of vice-chancellors is also testament to the money that is actually available.
But as much as we academics may complain about this spending, it is a model that makes good business sense. Potential customers (students) are attracted to the facilities that are available on campuses, which are relentlessly sold on open days. A major coffee chain has now become as essential a feature to a university as a library. Although such cafes presumably pay for themselves, our argument was about the symbol of marketisation they represent.
My own university, Birmingham City, recently moved from a deprived inner-city neighbourhood into a modern new building in the city centre. Most of my students have said that, regardless of the quality of the education, they would not have applied had we remained in the old building and location. The management at the University of Birmingham was also right about sociology; having a skeleton staff and no professors did not dent recruitment on to the degree.
And casual contracts in fact play a vital role in universities. My first job was as an hourly paid graduate teaching assistant running student seminars. This was invaluable experience, without which I am certain that I would not have my current job. The PhD students who are teaching a number of my seminar classes, on temporary part-time contracts or paid hourly, allow me to spend time doing the research that is fed back into my teaching. Short-term contracts are also necessary when academics win research grants and need time to dedicate to their projects.
This does not, however, explain the extraordinary levels of casualisation that we are seeing. I was lucky in that I only had to work at four different insecure jobs at the same time for six months – including doing data entry at a solicitor’s firm – before I landed the holy grail of a permanent full-time contract. One of my colleagues has spent the past seven years on temporary contracts at the same university, despite having launched and coordinated a masters programme. This precarity threatens to undermine the value of university education and deters people from entering the profession in the first place.
I know of a number of people who have abandoned academia completely. It turns out that having to supplement your pitiful income working in a call centre or as a cleaner is not the pay-off that my colleagues were expecting after years of investing in their education.
Part of the reason that redbrick universities tend to have a more casualised workforce is because of the increasing split between research and teaching. The mechanisms for evaluating research incentivise universities with the resources to invest in leading research staff, who spend very little time in the classroom. So a university may have the leading scholars in a field but students will be taught by junior staff, quite often on precarious contracts, who do not have the time or security to develop their research careers.
At the other end of this spectrum is the focus of some universities on being “teaching focused”. I have a colleague who was stuck bouncing between temporary part-time contracts for five years at redbrick universities, while being rejected for jobs at newer universities because he was deemed to be too “research focused” for the students. The lack of jobs in the sector in general means that there is always someone ready to snap up the crumbs of insecure positions when they become available.
Ultimately, the casualisation of the academic workforce undermines the quality of the education that is provided, short-changing not only the staff, who suffer the consequences of low-paid, insecure work, but also the students.
Fewer affordable homes were built in the past year than any time in the past 24 years, while there was a 52% fall in the supply of new homes in just 12 months.
Builders put the finishing touches to 32,110 affordable homes in England in the year to the end of March 2016, compared with 66,600 over the previous year, according to figures from the Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG).
Of those, just 6,550 – about 20% – were for social rent, which critics say is the only truly affordable housing tenure, with the rest made available to rent or buy at “affordable” rates of up to 80% of market value.
Critics said the figures were disastrous, and called on the government to do more to encourage housebuilding. They come as the proportion of households that own a property is at a 30-year low and rising house prices have driven the cost of buying a home to more than 10 times the average salary in a third of England and Wales.
Neal Hudson, a property market analyst for Savills, said the fall came as no surprise after 2014/15’s figures were inflated by developers racing to use up funds as the government’s previous affordable housing programme came to an end. Funds for a new programme were initially much lower, until more cash was released in last year’s autumn statement, he said.
In a report accompanying the release, the DCLG said the fall reflected the transition to new affordable housing programmes. “As part of a housebuilding cycle, delivery is normally lower in the first year of any new housing programme,” it said.
But John Healey, the shadow secretary of state for housing, accused the government of trying to massage the figures by redefining “affordable” to include many at close to an already inflated market rent.
“These figures … show we are now building the lowest number of social rented homes since records began and the number of affordable homes to buy has fallen by two-thirds since 2010,” he said.
“This all-time low results from Conservative ministers who have washed their hands of any responsibility to build the homes families on ordinary incomes need. We’ve seen six wasted years with the Tories in charge of housing. They have no long-term plan for housing and they’re doing too little to fix the housing crisis for millions of people, who are just managing to cover their housing costs.”
Anne Baxendale, the head of policy and public affairs at the housing charity Shelter, called the figures “not only shocking but unacceptable”.
“With 120,000 children set to spend Christmas homeless and in temporary accommodation and a whole generation of private renters living from one paycheck to the next, the new government needs to get a grip on this problem once and for all,” Baxendale said.
Responding to the criticism, a DCLG spokesman reiterated that housebuilding was cyclical and that lower completions were to be expected in the first year of any new housing programme.
“Building more homes is an absolute priority for this government, which is why we have doubled the housing budget to £8bn and we now have the largest affordable housing programme in 40 years,” he said.
“Furthermore, latest figures out this week show overall housebuilding is at its highest level in eight years and we will be publishing our white paper shortly, setting out our plans to build more homes and more quickly.”
A mortgage lender has added a clause to its home loans that allows borrowers to let out their property through Airbnb without asking its permission.
Generally lenders expect customers to ask permission before offering their homes for short-term lets, and some will charge a fee to give consent. A survey by the Guardian in April found some refused short-term lets completely, while others asked up to £295 in consent fees.
Metro Bank said its mortgage customers could now let their homes on Airbnb or similar sites for up to 90 days a year without contacting it for prior approval.
The change will apply to existing customers as well as new borrowers, and there are no restrictions on the size of the mortgage they need or type of deal they are on.
The bank, which was set up as a challenger to the main high street banks, said it was “a pioneering move to support the sharing economy”. It has previously joined forces with peer-to-peer lender Zopa to offer loans through its platform.
Paul Riseborough, chief commercial officer at Metro Bank, said: “Our focus is on making our customers’ lives as straightforward and convenient as possible, and we therefore hope today’s news will give our customers the reassurance they need to jump in and take advantage of everything the dynamic sharing economy has to offer.”
Airbnb allows homeowners to rent out rooms or entire properties for as long as they want, but in London there are rules restricting lets to 90 nights in a calendar year.
In practice, many may not alert their lender, but if a bank or building society was to find out a that customer had breached its terms, it could choose to demand early repayment of their mortgage.
Andrew Montlake, director of mortgage broker Coreco, said Metro Bank had taken an unusual but welcome stance.
“More people have begun to mention the possibility of utilising services such as Airbnb but most lenders will not allow you to rent out your property without consent to let from them,” he said. 
“It is important, however, to also check with your buildings and contents insurance provider whether you will still be covered if something happens while a third party is occupying the property even for a short time.”
It’s 6.30am and still dark, and Jean is setting out for her job as a home care worker. When she returns in 12 hours’ time she will have made 23 house calls to sick and elderly people, driven 20 miles between appointments and earned £64.80 before tax.
Jean isn’t her real name. Along with fellow care workers in this northern town she is on a zero-hours contract and fears losing work if her employer is unhappy with her. She fears that speaking out about how she has to race between visits, cutting short her appointments in order to earn the “national living wage”, might result in an immediate loss of earnings.
Jean is one of an army of care workers who go into people’s homes every day to help with tasks that enable them to keep living independently. As the population ages it is a growing industry, and more than 600,000 people are now employed in the care sector. Those working on the frontline – often for agencies working on council contracts – do jobs such as preparing food, making beds, prompting people to take their medication and tidying up. These jobs are often advertised on minimal rates of pay, and typically they involve no guaranteed working hours.
The agency, as she describes it, is a hard taskmaster. “I leave home at half six and I’ll probably get home at about seven and I’ll get about £270 a week,” she says. “The clients are all lovely and sometimes you go out of your way to do more for them, but it’s hard because there’s no time to get from one place to the next.”
Jean works 12 days on and two days off. Her list of appointments comes through on a Friday but can change during the week as people are discharged from hospital and added to her client list, or admitted to hospital and removed. She may also be asked to cover a colleague’s visits if they are off.
With a zero-hours contract, there is no minimum guarantee of work, and Jean’s days can shrink or grow. She cannot be sure from one day to the next how long she will work or how much she will earn. It can even change while she is on a shift: on the day that I trailed her she was expecting a six-hour shift in the morning but saw an appointment disappear from the roster on her phone while she was at another house. That meant she was instantly down £1.80 on the amount she expected to earn for the day. “Probably once a week you get a cancellation or they will ring you up and ask, ‘Can you do extra?,’” she says.
Some agencies offer higher rates of pay than Jean is on, but the tendency to offer zero-hours contracts still causes problems for workers. One care worker on the London living wage of £9.40 an hour told the Guardian that her weekly pay fell by almost £70 after she lost seven hours’ work. The cuts to shifts come as patients die or are taken into hospital, and workers can wait weeks to be allocated new visits.
In her role as a care worker Jean visits some homes three times a day, making breakfast, lunch and tea, and providing some of her clients with their only human contact all day. Her phone roster lists the jobs scheduled for the day and the length of each appointment. Typically there is a mix of 15-minute and 30-minute visits, although sometimes she is booked at a house for longer.
Councils typically pay agencies for visiting time. When Jean arrives at a house she swipes her phone to say she has arrived, and she swipes again when she leaves. She is paid for the time that is shown on the roster, rather than how long she is actually providing care. The phone tracks her movements throughout the day.
The roster allows no time for travel between appointments – and she is not paid for it. To stay with each client for the full appointment time and make it to the next one on time would require some kind of teleporter – in reality she has to cut every one of them short so that she can leave the house, sometimes put a key back into a safe, get back in her car and travel to the next address. As a result, sometimes appointments scheduled for 30 minutes actually last only 20 so she can stay on schedule. “I’m going to be running around like a headless chicken later,” she says, looking at the afternoon’s roster of short appointments.
On the day I shadow Jean, she works nine hours over two shifts and takes home £7.20 an hour for that time – exactly the national living wage, but only because she cuts appointments short to travel between clients.
She says it is a good day. The morning appointments are straightforward and with people she has visited before, so she knows where they live and how to find things in their homes.
But it is not always like that. “If I have a new patient I have to read the care plan, so that takes longer,” she says. “And I’m often in a home for longer than is scheduled. If I have to call an ambulance for someone I have to wait for it to arrive and I don’t get paid for that time. If I go over by five, 10, 15 minutes on a call then I don’t get paid for that.”
For Jean and other care workers, payment for transport expenses is erratic. She gets some money for petrol, she explains, but the amount varies and is never more than £10 a week. Business insurance cover for her car, along with wear and tear, all add to her costs. In London, one worker told the Guardian she received 56p to cover a week’s visits to a patient done by bus and on foot. A single fare costs £1.50.
For Jean, there are larger concerns than transport costs. It is stressful work, she says, and she feels she has little support. One of the worst things, she says, is the isolation. “It’s a lonely job,” she says – while she may see her colleagues driving past to their calls, she rarely has a chance to speak to them. “You are in the car on your own, you get to people’s houses and often face problems on your own. They tell you all of their worries and then you take them home. Often at night I’m tossing and turning worrying about them.” But despite this she says: “I love my job – I’m completely attached to it.”
The number of care workers on zero-hours contracts has jumped from one in 10 of the sector’s workforce to one in seven in the past year, according to an analysis of official data.
The increasing use of zero-hours contracts is revealed as a trade union boss described the abuse of minimum wage laws in the care sector as “endemic”. Dave Prentis, general secretary of Unison, said hourly pay was often reduced to levels below the legal minimum because care workers who visited the homes of those needing help to live independently were paid only for time spent with each client. They receive no pay for time spent travelling between appointments. “Without this exploitation and the sheer dedication of the workforce, the social care system would collapse,” Prentis said.
Data from the Office for National Statistics showed that between April and June this year, about 113,000 of the 769,000 workers who provided at-home care for vulnerable people or were employed in care homes were on contracts with no guaranteed hours. At approximately one in seven, that total represents a substantial and rapid increase on 2015, when one in 10 care workers were on zero-hours deals.
The analysis is published as part of a Guardian series investigating the increasing number of people in precarious work in the UK. Earlier this week it was revealed that more than one in five workers, or 7.1 million people, now work in conditions where they could lose their jobs suddenly.
Prentis accused HMRC of failing in its duty to ensure that workers receive the minimum wage. “The abuse of minimum wage laws is endemic across the homecare sector because the non-payment of travel time drags already low wages below legal minimums,” he said. “HMRC is meant to ensure all employers comply with the law, but it is failing to do so.”
The union is particularly concerned about underpayment to workers who travel to people’s homes to prepare food, get them in and out of bed, and help with other tasks that allow them to live independently. These workers are often paid an hourly rate – but only for the time they are in people’s homes. Time spent travelling between appointments is not paid.
Workers who are paid less than legal minimums – £7.20 a hour for those aged over 25 – can take their complaints to Acas, which will refer them to HMRC to investigate.
More than 130 care firms are currently under the scrutiny of HMRC; in the two years to 31 March 2016, it found employees were owed almost £1m in missed pay as a result of breaches of minimum wage law.
The Labour MP Paul Blomfield, who has raised the issue of care workers’ wages in parliament, said he believed the practice of not paying workers for the time they needed to travel between visits was widespread.
Blomfield said he knew of one resident in his Sheffield constituency who was “crisscrossing” the city to visit clients but not paid for her journey time: “She was working for eight hours or so, but being paid only for four hours.”
Prentis said the government, HMRC and councils all knew that non-payment for travel time was commonplace. He called on the government to “ensure that pay laws are properly enforced and give social care the resources it needs in this month’s autumn statement”.
Blomfield also criticised HMRC for not having a formal process to revisit employers who had flouted minimum wage laws and for dealing only with the complaint of the employee who had raised a concern about their wages – rather than checking the payments received by all employees of offending firms.
In a letter to Jane Ellison, financial secretary to the Treasury, the MP says: “From the 36 social-care employers that have been named and shamed to date, 21 of these employers have had just one worker identified as being owed arrears.”
He added: “There is a likelihood that other care workers at these providers may not have been paid what they are historically owed, and so checks on their position would seem appropriate.”
Haringey council and the care agency Sevacare are currently facing a case brought by 17 employees who say they were earning as little as £3.27 an hour for providing live-in care or visiting people’s homes. Sevacare said it paid the staff “an average hourly rate, that is at least the minimum wage.
Earlier this year Sevacare was involved in another case where a care worker in Manchester was awarded more than £3,000 for unpaid hours while making house visits.
Judith Montgomery, the care worker who brought that case, said she regularly spent longer than the scheduled appointments and did a 50-hour week for 30 hours’ pay. “In a 15-minute appointment you would be expected to get somebody up, get them washed and dressed, give them their medication and fill in the paperwork,” she said. “You could be there for 25 or 30 minutes but you would only be getting paid for 15.”
Unison’s Prentis said cases like Montgomery’s were rare, but only because it was so often difficult to decipher the information on payslips. “Cases against employers are rare because payslips are so difficult to understand, and the widespread use of zero-hours means employees are reluctant to complain, for fear their hours may be taken away.”
Blomfield has also met with the government as part of a move to make payslips easier to read. In some cases payment advice runs over many pages and can be almost impenetrable. On one typical payslip seen by the Guardian, a worker appeared to be listed making two visits at the same time.
A number of care workers told the Guardian that their hours – and income – could fluctuate markedly and reported they were afraid of taking time off, even to deal with family crises, in case they upset their employers and lost shifts as a result.
Citizens Advice said it had heard from many workers in the sector who had problems linked to the insecurity of their jobs. Gillian Guy, chief executive of the charity, said: “Not knowing what hours you’re working from one week to the next, or how much money you will lose to travel costs, can make it very difficult to manage household finances. It can also cause problems with other aspects of money management, such as whether you can get a mortgage or even commit to a mobile phone contract.”
According to the UK Home Care Association, which represents care providers, councils need to pay agencies £16.70 an hour to cover the cost of paying workers and provide enough profit to keep the businesses sustainable. The average paid by councils which provided data was only £14.58.
Blomfield said: “We can’t allow care workers to be bearing the brunt for decisions made way above their heads about how much we are willing to pay for social care.”
A HMRC spokesman said: “All businesses, irrespective of their size or business sector, are responsible for paying the correct minimum wage to their staff. HMRC continues to crack down on employers who ignore the law. At the start of the year HMRC had 130 open investigations into care providers as a result of complaints made by employees and as a result of our targeted enforcement campaign, ensuring that care workers receive the wages they are entitled to. As part of this we are taking targeted action against some of the biggest social care providers.
“If anyone is concerned that they are not receiving the minimum wage, they can contact ACAS, in confidence, on 0300 123 1100. The Acas helpline is open Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 8am to 8pm, Tuesday 8am to 6pm, and Saturday 9am to 1pm. Cases can be dealt with anonymously, with no risk of employees being identified.”
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
Crackdown on whiplash claims could knock £40 off car insurance bills
Most renters feel they’re unlikely to buy home in next five years
Asda and Tesco cut up to three pence off petrol and diesel prices
Collective switching: can clubbing together lower your energy bills?
The countdown to Christmas is under way and retailers have unveiled their list of top toys. We look at where to get them at the best price – and find one that is already sold out. And if you prefer to let them choose their own gift, we have a guide to the small print to beware of when buying vouchers.
‘Confused’ Axa use every excuse in the book to avoid my travel insurance claim
Only a three-day window to return clothes from H&M’s Kenzo range
Our Nectar luggage payment to easyJet landed up in hold
If you need to send money overseas get expert guidance, competitive exchange rates and free online transfers from the Guardian money transfer service, provided by Moneycorp. 
Make sure your holidays are covered for a whole year with the Guardian’s annual travel cover, provided by Voyager.
Collective energy-switching schemes promise to save consumers hundreds of pounds as well as taking the stress and confusion out of changing providers. But do they find you the best deal?
The idea behind collective energy switching is simple: a large group of people use their bulk-buying power to negotiate unique deals from energy suppliers. The more the merrier, as better deals are likely to be offered to big groups of customers. 
Each collective scheme is marketed by a third party – these include a range of organisations from local authorities to newspapers. Many collective switches target groups that might not have changed energy supplier before.
Stephen Murray, energy expert at Moneysupermarket.com, says: “Analysis and insight shows that the collective switch vehicle helps customers feel part of a group and to engage in a market, where previously they were reluctant to or had become disengaged.”
How does it work?
Behind the scenes, the calculations, negotiation and switching is normally done by a price comparison site. Energyhelpline runs a lot of collective switches and pools all the households registered with separate schemes around the country into one big pot, then uses the group’s bulk-buying power to its advantage. Its last three collectives have saved consumers an average of £327 against standard tariffs, it says.
Another big name is iChoosr, which works with more than 150 local councils. It is behind The Big London Energy Switch scheme, as well as a collective switch promoted by UKPower.
One attraction of collectives is that the winning supplier is often one of the big six, such as British Gas or E.ON, which might reassure people who are nervous about moving to a new deal with a firm they haven’t heard of. Usually the best-buy tables are dominated by challenger brands, such as Iresa, Avro Energy and Affect Energy, which first-time switchers may be hesitant to choose.
Energy suppliers like collective switches as they gain a large number of new customers in a short span of time. As with individual switches, they pay price comparison sites a commission of £25-£30 per fuel, which is normally split with the organisation marketing the scheme.
MoneySavingExpert and Moneysupermarket both run their own collective switches. The former has just completed its fifth Big Energy Switch event, which resulted in readers being offered a dual-fuel deal by British Gas, fixed until October 2017. The website claims the deal will save a typical household on a big six standard tariff £300 a year.
Moneysupermarket (which owns MoneySavingExpert) runs a monthly collective switch called the Energy Bill Buster. Last year, the site negotiated British Gas’s cheapest tariff in four years, saving customers on standard rates an average of £357.
“Collective switches operated by Moneysupermarket directly or on behalf of MoneySavingExpert have delivered tariffs that are either market-leading or among the cheapest deals available at that time,” says Murray. In May, the group organised a market-leading one-year fixed-rate tariff from EDF through a collective switch.
Although collective tariffs can be the cheapest deals on offer, this is not guaranteed. When collective switching schemes talk about savings of £300 or more it’s important to note that this is in relation to the average price of the standard tariffs offered by the big six energy providers (British Gas, nPower, EON, Scottish and Southern, Scottish Power and EDF), not the cheapest deals on the market.
Mark Todd, co-founder of Energyhelpline, admits the savings offered by collectives versus best buys are modest. “Our winter collective winners beat the cheapest comparable (one-year fixed-price tariff) by £20 a year. They cost £732 a year and the cheapest open-market fixed tariff then was £752 a year,” he says.
How do you switch?
There are typically four key stages: registration, auction, personal offer and acceptance.
In the registration phase, the switch organiser will ask for some basic details – typically your name, address and details of your current gas and electricity tariffs.
Next, the switch organiser invites energy companies to take place in a “reverse auction”, where firms bid to supply energy to the group. Collective switches tend to use a one-year fixed-rate tariff as their headline deal, but they offer other rates too, such as two-year fixed rates, green tariffs, paper bills, prepayment deals and regional offers.
The winning tariffs are advertised to registered members and a personal offer made. Customers aren’t obliged to accept the offer. To be sure of getting the best deal you should compare the collective tariff to the cheapest on the market, factoring any exit fees on yout current deal into your calculations.
Are there any downsides?
One potential issue is the timescale involved. The process can take a couple of months before the switch begins. It’s quicker to change suppliers using a price comparison site as the process starts straight away – a couple of months languishing on your supplier’s standard tariff could cost you dear.
Claire Osborne, energy expert at uSwitch.com, says: “Consumers looking to switch through a collective should first make sure they have fully assessed their individual situation because their personal circumstances could mean they find a better deal on their own, rather than in a group. In many cases it may be easier or cheaper for a consumer to switch individually.”
Q My girlfriend and I got our first mortgage of £205,000 on a house in February 2015. The mortgage has a 30-year term and an interest rate of 2.3%, making our monthly repayments £790. We have made great efforts to make overpayments so that we are in a better position when we remortgage early next year.
We are looking at a remortgage of £186,000 which – assuming the house is then worth £300,000 – will mean that the LTV (loan to value) should be just over 60%. We are hoping to find a mortgage with a rate of 1%.
However, since the Brexit vote, we are keen to move to the continent. My girlfriend is French, has just finished a PhD and will be looking for work soon. I am in a secure job and it will take me a bit more time to get one abroad. Essentially, we would like to make the move next year, but there is no guarantee on timescales.
If we move, we plan to rent the house out. But as we cannot be certain about timings we were planning initially remortgage as occupiers and then notify the lender once we know when the house would actually be rented out. This would probably mean that by the time we did let the property, there would be about a year left until the next remortgage – assuming we get a two-year fixed-rate deal when we remortgage early next year.
The question is, is this reasonable or should we be looking for a buy-to-let mortgage? What rate change could we expect after notifying on an occupier rate and would this be better than a buy-to-let rate? Also, I was thinking of keeping the term on the mortgage long to maximise income on the rental to help cover for any shortfalls or repairs needed along the way. Finally, could there be issues with us living abroad? JR
A Assuming the deal is still on offer when you come to remortgage early next year, you could find one with an interest rate of 1% – or to be precise 0.99% – with the two-year fixed-rate special from HSBC. This mortgage is available to you because you want to borrow less than 65% of the value of your home and less than £500,000. But the hefty £1,499 booking fee may mean that you would be better off looking at interest rates of less than 1.5% available from other lenders.
However, as your circumstances are likely to change before the fixed-rate period is up, I would be wary of being locked into a fixed-rate deal at all. Rather than being driven by interest rates, you need to look into how a lender will treat you if you subsequently let the house. It is reasonable to remortgage with the aim of getting “consent to let” from the lender, but the consequences of this vary. Some lenders, for example, charge an administration fee and keep the interest rate the same. Others will put the interest rate up by 1%-1.5%.
Most lenders will want to know that the mortgage meets the criteria of a buy-to-let mortgage even if you are not required to switch to a buy-to-let product. So they will want to know that the mortgage is no more than 75% of the value of the property and that rental income will cover the mortgage repayments by 125%. Another thing to bear in mind is that lenders rarely give consent to let within 12 months of a residential mortgage being taken out, which could be a problem if you do remortgage early next year and then move abroad shortly after.
You could also face difficulties if you move abroad before making the necessary mortgage arrangements because you’ll be classed as an ex-pat mortgage applicant. Only a few lenders – including HSBC and Skipton International – are willing to lend to UK expats living abroad. They won’t lend in certain countries, although that restriction doesn’t apply to those in the EU.
I booked easyJet flights through the Nectar website and paid for hold luggage for our family of five. At the airport we were told I hadn’t booked any hold luggage. EasyJet’s customer services desk suggested that this happens a lot when people book through Nectar. I had to pay for the five bags with the reassurance I’d be able to claim the money back on my return.
However, Nectar refuses to pay. It says that my confirmation email didn’t show that baggage had been paid for. Well, no, it didn’t. But neither did it state “cabin baggage only” – which an easyJet confirmation normally does.
Obviously it’s in its interests to say as little as possible on confirmation emails – and I have no control over what they choose to specify. My return boarding pass, on the other hand, does declare that I’d paid for hold luggage even though there was no record of this when we flew home, so I had to fork out yet again. AC, Edinburgh
EasyJet claims that your predicament is rare and that, while hold baggage was added to your original booking, it was not transferred on to its system. Nectar, when alerted by The Observer suddenly discovers that you did pay for the luggage after all. It says it is investigating how this could have happened.
Now, after weeks of intransigence, it can’t do enough, phoning twice in an hour, transferring the money to your account and donating 5,000 Nectar points (about £25-worth) to soothe your feelings. It would be interesting to know if airline staff are right and this is a frequent pitfall with Nectar bookings.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
When Luz Restrepo looked around the classroom, she was struck by the realisation that it was full of women there to learn English – but many had been living in Australia for one or two decades. 
“I realised this was my future if I didn’t change my present. The only person who can change my future is myself. I need to change my attitude around why I am here,” she says.
Restrepo, a political refugee from Colombia, came to Australia with hardly a word of English and little hope of being able return to her professional career.
Many of her classmates were also refugees and some had never been in paid employment. “They had the same problems as me: lack of English and lack of confidence,” she says.
To help both herself and the other women, she started organising them, finding skills they could use to earn money and founded a social enterprise called SisterWorks.
Based in Melbourne, SisterWorks assists women who are migrants, asylum seekers and refugees to start and run their own micro businesses. It helps them identify and learn skills they can use to earn money (such as crafts or cooking) and then coaches them on how to sell their products and make a business from them.
Women, in particular, appear to be drawn to start social enterprises, according to Social Traders – a not-for-profit company that helps develop social enterprises. These are defined as commercially viable businesses existing to benefit the public and the community, rather than shareholders and owners. In Social Traders’ skills development program, about 70% of participants are from social enterprises led by women.
SisterWorks is one of a growing number of social enterprises that aim to help people who have had to flee their countries of origin. Others include the Bread and Butter Project (training bakers), Streat (help for the homeless) and Soft Landing (recycling mattresses).
One of the particular challenges for businesses working with refugees is accommodating the needs of people who have been traumatised by their experiences.
For instance, when Restrepo arrived in Australia in 2010 with her husband and two daughters, she left after an incident where she was kidnapped, although she prefers not to elaborate. She was leaving behind everything she knew to escape the persecution she had suffered because of her leftwing politics.
Although trained as a medical doctor, she had been working as a communications expert and business administrator before she left. Her husband was an architect.
“I used to be a busy professional woman and the majority of my time was spent outside the home,” she says. Without the hired home help that is customary in middle-class Colombia, she had to learn to cook and clean for the first time with little money to live on.
“I fell into a big depression, with post-traumatic disorder because of the past experience and the present reality,” she says.
She launched SisterWorks in 2013 and it now involves about 80 “sisters” from 24 countries. Seven of them have already started their own businesses, 31 are now trading and making between $200 and $400 per month, and 10 women are earning more than $1000 per month.
Female-led social enterprises are more likely to focus on solving local, place-based issues, because that is what women see as they move around their own communities, says Cheryl Kernot, now a social business fellow at the Centre for Social Impact.
“They see a gap in the market, they spot unused buildings, they find ways to harness some aspects of business practices for social purpose,” she says.
Another Melbourne enterprise, the Sorghum Sisters, is a case in point. It launched in 2004 in the kitchen of Carlton primary school to help women from the African community get into the workforce.
Founded by Siti Ibrahim, Nuria Khalil and Rahma Ibrahim, refugees from the Horn of Africa, the company trains people to work in hospitality and runs a catering arm that supplies African dishes to clients that include non-government organisations (NGOs) and government departments. It has about 1,500 clients on its database.
It began as a collaborative endeavour between AMES Australia (Adult Multicultural Education Services), the Horn of Africa Communities Network (HACN) and Carlton primary school.
The manager of social enterprises catering at AMES Australia, Melinda Hall, says many of the school mothers had never been to school themselves. “Over the years, we have probably had about 300 work placement clients come through and we have done a couple of rounds of hospitality training,” she says. She says the business tries to “clear” about $900 per day, although she adds: “We haven’t broken even yet.”
Kernot says she is aware there is a lot of “social washing” by businesses, which are prepared to call themselves social enterprises if they give 10% of their profits to a cause. “However, the definition that we are coming to is that at least 60% of profits get reinvested in their core social purpose,” she says. “But the good ones I know are all [reinvesting] 100%.”
The Social Outfit employs and trains people from refugee and new migrant communities. Clients are offered training and experience in clothing production, retail and design at the retail store, on-site manufacturing, and sewing school in Newtown, Sydney. It was launched two years ago by chief executive Jackie Ruddock, who helped to raise $25,000 by committing to wearing a Ken Done-themed outfit every day for a year and sharing the photos online.
Angkor Flowers and Crafts in Sydney’s south-west is a social enterprise to train women from refugee and migrant communities in floristry. Sophea Chea started the project in 2014 to create opportunities for social inclusion for women from cultures that do not encourage education in girls. Most of the women, so far, come from Cambodia, Thailand, China and Myanmar although the service is open to people from all backgrounds.
SettleIn is an app to help refugees adjust to life in Australia, communicate with case workers, share paperwork and documentation, and help to plan and set goals. The idea for the app came from a TechFugees Australia hackathon in November 2015 , when British aid worker Alice Brennan (now CEO) came together with a Syrian refugee (who prefers anonymity to protect his family in Syria) and Remi Duracher (co-founder of StartupSocial).
One in three working families struggle to pay their energy bills, it has been claimed, as pressure mounts on suppliers to do more to help poorer households move on to the cheapest deals.
Twenty-nine per cent of families do not put on the heating even when the house is cold, said comparison website uSwitch, while two-thirds fear cutting their energy use to save money will affect their family’s health.
“It’s appalling that even families in work are struggling to pay their energy bills,” said uSwitch’s energy expert, Claire Osborne. “Suppliers must play their part by doing all they can to help their customers move to their best deal.”
The energy regulator, Ofgem, backed calls for suppliers to alert customers to cost-saving schemes such as the warm home discount (WHD).
The initiative forces firms with more than 250,000 customers to offer a £140 discount to low-income pensioners and other vulnerable groups, though it has been criticised for long delays in delivering the reduction.
“We want suppliers to engage more actively with customers, particularly those on standard variable tariffs, to help them get a better deal,” said an Ofgem spokesperson.
This week the business minister criticised energy companies amid claims they were profiteering from deals that do not offer good value.
“Customers who are loyal to their energy supplier should be treated well, not taken for a ride, and it’s high time the big companies recognised this,” Greg Clark said. “I have made clear to the big firms that this can’t go on and they must treat customers properly or be made to do so.”
Responding to the uSwitch survey, a spokesman for the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “This government is on the side of energy customers and providing vital support for people in our community who need it most.
“We continue to support the warm home discount scheme … and are refocusing the ‘energy company obligation’ [a government energy efficiency measure] so it effectively tackles the cause of fuel poverty.”
But the energy company First Utility accused the big six suppliers – British Gas, E.ON, npower, SSE, Scottish Power and EDF Energy – of undermining the WHD scheme.
It said 70% of people who get the discount are on expensive standard variable tariffs (SVTs) and are often unaware their supplier offers cheaper deals.
First Utility estimated that 1.5 million vulnerable customers were overpaying by £440m a year, or £300 per household, more than wiping out their WHD benefit.
“This means the £140 WHD payment goes straight back into the big six’s coffers,” said the firm, adding that customers were being “hoodwinked”.
“It’s plain wrong that the poorest and most vulnerable are being charged over the odds for their energy,” said First Utility’s chief executive, Ed Kamm. “We want the government to stop the big six energy companies from taking advantage of the [WHD] scheme at the expense of struggling families.”
Labour MP Frank Field, who is backing First Utility’s campaign, has written to Theresa May urging her to protect the “vulnerable underbelly of British society”, after she highlighted energy costs in her speech at the Conservative party conference.
But one industry insider cast doubt on the wisdom of Field’s suggestion. “It’s simple A-level maths. What happens if everyone goes on the lowest tariff? The lowest tariff goes up.”
British Gas said: “No energy company does more than us to help vulnerable customers, and that included paying the warm home discount as soon as possible to hundreds of thousands of customers.
“We regularly tell our customers if they could switch to a cheaper tariff and thousands of them do. This includes many customers who qualify for the warm home discount.”
But Scottish Power, another big six firm, said it was aware that not enough of the poorest customers were on the cheapest deals and was taking steps to address this.
“We have already identified that more can be done to help warm home discount customers, and we are finalising our plans to take action this winter.”
Millions of motorists could see their car insurance bills cut by £40 a year, the government says, after it announced a crackdown on the “epidemic” of exaggerated and fraudulent whiplash injury claims.
The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) proposals would make obtaining a payout much tougher and, according to insurers, will end the UK’s status as the whiplash capital of the world. The proposals are intended to stamp out a “toxic” compensation culture that has pushed up motor premiums, led to consumers being bombarded with nuisance text messages and calls, and put additional pressure on the NHS.
The MoJ has proposed either scrapping the right to compensation for minor whiplash injuries or putting a cap on the amount people can claim. It said capping compensation would see the average payout cut from £1,850 to a maximum of £425, with this money only paid out where a medical report was provided as proof of injury.
One whiplash claim is paid out every 60 seconds, and the number has soared 50% in a decade, despite the UK having some of the safest roads in Europe and a fall in the number of accidents, according to the government. The AA said it was “shocking” that, of more than 800,000 small injury claims registered through the MoJ last year, an estimated 750,000 related to whiplash.
The easy access to motor injury compensation has also seen the rise of “crash for cash” scams, where criminal gangs submit false claims in relation to car accidents that were either staged – thereby putting innocent motorists at risk of harm – or never happened.
Earlier this year, Britain’s biggest insurer, Aviva, said whiplash was costing motorists £2.5bn a year, adding £93 to the average motor insurance premium.
A clampdown was signalled by George Osborne in his 2015 autumn statement, but last month it was reported that the planned reforms had been delayed or shelved. The insurance industry was therefore relieved to see the MoJ announce its consultation on tacking the “unacceptable” situation.
Another key government proposal would curb excessive legal costs by effectively removing lawyers from the process in many cases. It would do this by raising the upper limit for all personal injury claims to be heard in the small claims court from £1,000 to £5,000. This is significant because, typically, legal costs in the small claims court are not recoverable.
Aviva has said nine out of 10 of the motor injury claims it received were for between £1,000 and £5,000.
However, this change is likely to prompt anger in some quarters because it will also affect injury claims unconnected to whiplash - such as claims for workplace accidents.
• Introducing a transparent tariff system of compensation payments for claims with more significant injuries.
• Banning offers to settle claims without medical evidence. All claims would need a report from a MedCo-accredited medical expert before any payout was made. MedCo is the body charged by the government with overseeing the production of independent medical reports in whiplash claims.
The MoJ said the problems had been fuelled by a predatory claims industry that encouraged minor, exaggerated and bogus claims. Elizabeth Truss, the justice secretary, said: “For too long, some have exploited a rampant compensation culture and seen whiplash claims as an easy payday, driving up costs for millions of law-abiding motorists.”
Many leading insurers have already pledged to pass on 100% of the savings from the reforms to their customers.
LV=, one of the insurers welcoming the proposals, said its own research suggested each Briton received an average of 468 nuisance calls and text messages every year. It also estimated that, between them, the country’s GPs saw 116,000 people every month that they suspected were inventing or exaggerating an injury in order to claim compensation.
Not everyone welcomed the clampdown, however. Law firm Thompsons Solicitors said: “Despite government figures showing that the number of injury claims are down, they have allowed themselves to be bullied by insurers into reviving hugely unfair plans to remove access to justice for the injured, without producing a shred of evidence to justify them.”
The Football Supporters’ Federation has vowed to keep campaigning for lower ticket prices and has welcomed the findings of BBC Sport’s latest Price of Football study, which has indicated some prices have fallen.
Overall, 33% of ticket prices have been reduced across the Premier League in 2016‑17 – the first season of a record £5.3bn TV deal – with 53% frozen at previous levels.
The most notable drop was in ticket costs for away supporters. The average price is now £29.44, a reduction of 37%, thanks mostly to an agreement among clubs to impose a cap of £30.
But this has turned attention to the Championship, where the average cost to away fans has risen to £31.57, while the FSF is also unhappy with season-ticket prices.
The average cheapest season ticket in the Premier League is down 6.63% to £479.89 but while Hull’s lowest is only £252, Arsenal’s least expensive is £1,014. The Gunners’ top season ticket is also the most expensive at £2,013, followed by Tottenham (£1,895) and Chelsea (£1,250).
Malcolm Clarke, the chairman of the FSF, said: “We believe it’s a positive thing that almost three-quarters of ticket prices have been reduced or frozen. That’s thanks in no small part to pressure from football supporters up and down the country. Football fans have been arguing articulately and passionately for a reduction in ticket prices for several years now. This sustained effort from supporters has delivered real progress such as the £30 cap on away ticket prices in the Premier League.
“There is no room for complacency, however, with some Premier League clubs charging far too much for their season tickets and away ticket prices in the Championship being the most expensive in the country.
“We will remain vigilant and continue our campaigning to make football affordable for this generation of supporters and the next.”
Catch some rays in these properties from South Africa to Florida and ... Kent
Every day tens of thousands of Australians have to take a syringe, prick their skin with a needle and then inject themselves with insulin. Imagine if every one of those diabetes sufferers had a device fitted inside their body that measured their sugar levels and automatically released insulin as and when required.
That’s one of several projects on the go in a research partnership between the Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science and Dublin City University in Ireland. Other initiatives include a Sweatch watch that measures levels of sodium ion in your sweat and a “smart tattoo” that tracks the status of dermatological diseases.
The medical possibilities for intelligent, internet-enabled medical devices is vast, with one recent estimate expecting the global market to be worth US$163bn by 2020. To date, the so-called wearables market (think Fitbit, Apple Watch and so forth) has made the most of the early running. But the scientific value – and potential commercial returns – for next-generation implantables represents a different level of magnitude.
“The possibility for harvesting real-time health data from an implantable device is huge,” says Aoife Morrin, principal investigator at Dublin City University’s National Centre for Sensor Research. “A wearable typically has access to the outer layers of skin whereas an implantable can potentially look into internal organs and deeper tissues inside the body.”
It’s not only medical researchers that are growing excited at the prospect of knowing more about our insides. Predictably, pharmaceutical firms have been quick to seize on the technology’s potential. Automated systems get around the problem of patients failing to take their medication or not replacing it (a habitual problem that hits Big Pharma’s sales hard). As importantly, ongoing real-time diagnostic data helps corroborate a drug’s effectiveness, thus increasing the likelihood of that drug being prescribed.
Consider Proteus Discover, the brainchild of the US healthcare firm Proteus Digital Health. Discover is a microscopic sensor contained within an ingestible pill. The sensor activates on contact with stomach acids and then starts relaying clinical health data to a replaceable patch worn on the patient’s torso. The technique is initially being used primarily for patients with cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, such as hypertension and Type 2 diabetes.
The patch also registers the time that the medication was taken and a patient’s subsequent behavioural patterns (sleep, exercise, etc). All this information is then loaded up wirelessly to an app on the patient’s smartphone and then to the Proteus Cloud.
“By turning the high frequency act of medication taking into a digital event, Proteus is directly integrating therapies with greater measurement, feedback and behaviour cues,” says Andrew Thompson, Proteus’ chief executive. 
 
 Healthcare investors appear to share his enthusiasm. In April, the biotech firm secured US$50m in its latest funding round, adding to the US$172m it raised in 2014.
Another company making inroads in the implantable market is Microchips Biotech. The US firm has created an electronic device that employs “micro-reservoir” technology first developed by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to deliver therapeutic doses of a variety of drugs from within. 
 
 A physician can alter the pre-programmed frequency or quantity of the dose via wireless communications. Alternatively, sensors embedded in the device can release the drug automatically in response to physiological or metabolic changes. Last year, the Israeli drug firm Teva Pharmaceuticals invested US$35m as part of a partnership with Microchips.
For all the hype around new-generation implantable technology, the market remains in its infancy. Most ideas are still at prototype stage, if that. Even assuming the technology can be cracked and proven to be safe, several important hurdles still stand in the way of implantables revolutionising medical care.
The first is cultural. Wearing a watch that monitors your heart rate or a bracelet that measures your sleep is one thing; having an electromagnetic sensor inserted permanently inside you is quite another. That said, few think twice now about surgically implanted pacemakers or hearing aids, say, so maybe time will overcome the initial ick factor.
 
 Less certain is the cultural aversion many have towards data privacy. The critical difference with a pacemaker or hearing aid, of course, is that implantables “talk” back. An endless supply of high personal data, always being generated, never stopping – and potentially going who knows where and for who knows what purpose. 
 
 Device manufacturers, pharmaceutical firms and healthcare providers are naturally at pains to say patient data is protected by standard patient-physician confidentiality. Proteus, for instance, asserts that data is only passed on to healthcare providers with the patient’s explicit consent and with the sole purpose of “informing personalised treatment decisions”.
What about cybersecurity breaches, however? If hackers can infiltrate the medical records of sports stars such as British cyclist Bradley Wiggins and the US gymnast Simone Biles, what’s to say biometric information from your implantable might somehow find its way to your health insurance provider or to a tech company like Google (which is currently experimenting with a “smart” contact lens)?
 
 While such fears are not without reason, Erin Byrne, the chief client officer at the US healthcare communications firm Grey Health Group, insists that “proactive” measures can ease patient concerns. “If companies follow the governance regulations that are in place and communicate truthfully, then I think people recognise the benefit to them and that data is a propeller of good health.”
There’s also the question around who will pay to have a new-generation implantable inserted. If current implantable devices are anything to go by, Australians could find themselves having to reach deeper into their own pockets. Last month, the health department removed 2,500 pacemakers, artificial hips and other implantable products from its official prostheses register. The move will reduce how much private insurance firms have to contribute towards the fitting of such devices in the future.
The promise of better health – both for individual patients and, in the event their data is used for medical research, for the wider population – certainly serves as a powerful counterbalance to privacy concerns. But will implantables really deliver? 
 
 Therein lies the second big hurdle: efficacy. The main selling point for implantables is that they can create “more accurate, more timely” information quicker than ever before, says Adrian Downing, the director of healthcare at the UK advisory firm Concentra Analytics. “But that suggests that clinicians have time to look at the data and, if they do, that they trust it and understand its full context,” he says.
Implantables promise to usher in a patient-data led form of healthcare that discomfits many medical practitioners, which see it as a loss of their traditional control. Downing cites doctors’ reticence about allowing the development of a single database for patients’ medical information in the UK. The ill-fated scheme eventually got scrapped because of low uptake by the medical profession.
“The critical question governing implantables’ effectiveness is how the data is used within existing healthcare services,” Downing says. “Even now with wearables, none of the information is going to GPs [general practitioners]. The system is simply stopping it.”
Joanne Hackett concurs. As chief commercial officer at Precision Medicine Catapult, a UK firm promoting the commercialisation of data-driven medicine, she stresses the need for patient’s information to “follow them” through the health system.
She points to Sweden as a good example of a liberal, “linked-up” approach to patient data. The system stems for a very particular mentality, she adds. “Every patient is considered a research patient, so people don’t think twice about being included in a clinical trial.”
She also singles out Australia for its promotion of “person-controlled” electronic health records. Earlier this year, the Australian Health Association issued a revised policy statement that called for a “simple consent mechanism” that would allow doctors across the healthcare service to access patients’ records. 
 
 “All healthcare providers involved in providing clinical care to a patient should have access to the core clinical information, provided their registered health profession board has a policy on electronic health records covering conditions for such access by their members,” the AMA argues. 
Our report that a well-qualified academic once earned so little on his casual contract that he had to supplement it with a job as a refuse collector is confirmation that precarious work has metastasised from unskilled or elementary-level jobs to reach parts of the economy once considered the epitome of security. According to analysis of the official figures by the University and College Union, more than half of academics in Britain’s universities, where students are paying £9,000 a year in fees, are employed on temporary or insecure contracts. They are recruits to a burgeoning class of workers, many of them described as self-employed, that make up the “just about managing”. Ranging from agency workers in warehouses and care assistants to the top-grade professions, these are the people who Theresa May has pledged to put at the heart of her response to the Brexit revolt.
As the prime minister acknowledged again in her Guildhall speech on Monday, getting it right for people on middle to low incomes is a precondition of the defence of liberalism. The shape of Britain’s workforce has been transformed in the past decade. What was once genuinely welcomed by employers and employees as flexible employment now looks much more like exploitation, made all too easy by an under-regulated jobs market. Nearly a quarter of the 32 million people in work fit this description of precarious employment; the biggest group among them are the self-employed, a definition that once suggested the budding entrepreneur or the local builder but now might also mean the Uber driver who picks you up at 2am on a Sunday morning. This is the kind of work that is undermining 100 years of confidence that children will do better than their parents, the belief that underpins social democracy.
As today’s state of the nation report on social mobility shows, people who start out in these low-paid jobs – where young workers have experienced a 15% fall in hourly rates since 2008 – struggle to escape them. Funding is scarce for “second chance” education for older workers looking to improve skills or learn new ones; further education colleges that might provide post-16 education to students who don’t go to university are losing out to apprenticeship schemes.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, is under pressure from No 10 to introduce measures in next week’s autumn statement to tackle this exploitation. He wants to raise income tax thresholds, a costly move that helps higher earners more than those at the bottom. Instead, he should abandon universal credit cuts and resist calls to slow the increase in the rate of the “national living wage”. He should slash fees for employment tribunals, which have led to a two-thirds reduction in the number of cases. And, after our report on employment agencies, he should make sure that HMRC really is making the people behind tax avoidance schemes feel its inspectors’ hot breath on their necks. He might start work on simplifying tax law too.
In fact, a major overhaul of employment law is overdue. It is no longer fit for purpose. Ministers must recognise the impact of the transformation in the way people work, and the laws designed for a world when most people had permanent jobs don’t work properly. Matthew Taylor, who has been asked to review workers’ rights, is likely to want to look at this area when he starts his investigative roadshow round the country. But here is a short list of small changes backed by the TUC that might start to restore workers’ protection.
At the moment, there are three categories of employment – people on permanent contracts, people on zero-hours or agency contracts, and the self-employed. Only the first category is entitled to full employment protection including redundancy payments, unfair dismissal and parental leave. If casual workers had stronger rights, then the claim that zero-hours contracts are perfect for parents with caring responsibilities could be turned from a fiction – where the choice can lie all with the employer – to fact, and pregnant women could get paid leave for antenatal appointments. If, in addition, the so-called self-employed were assumed to be employed unless the employer, rather than the employee, could prove they weren’t, then workers would be protected from the kind of forced self-employment that Uber drivers are complaining about. Mrs May is right to identify the problem. Tackling this shopping list of rights would go to the heart of the disadvantage that contributed to the millions of protest votes on 23 June.
The Bank of England is gaining powers to curb any lax lending in the fast growing buy-to-let mortgage sector, an area it has identified as posing a potential risk to the financial system.
The Treasury is to give Threadneedle Street the ability to restrict the size of loan relative to the value of a property and also limit the size of loans relative to the amount of rent landlords receive to cover interest payments.
It follows a consultation which was launched by the Treasury in December, at a time when the Bank was warning about the impact of the sector, because of concerns that landlords would be more likely to sell if they ran into payment difficulties; in turn, the markets could be flooded with properties and affect home buyers.
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, said: “It is crucial that Britain’s independent regulators have the tools they need to keep our financial system as safe as possible.”
The powers are technically being given to the Bank’s financial policy committee (FPC), which was set up following the banking crisis to look for the large risks to financial stability.
“Expanding the number of tools at the financial policy committee’s disposal will ensure that the buy-to-let sector can continue to make an important contribution to our economy, while allowing the regulator to address any potential risks to financial stability,” Hammond said.
The Bank is expected later this week to set out its ideas for how it might use its powers. It will be able to use the powers next year once legislation is approved by MPs and peers.
It has already taken some action to curb the buy-to-let mortgage market, which has fuelled lending growth. In March the FPC set out measures intended to reduce the number of new buy-to-let mortgages by between 10% and 20% during 2018.
The measures included requiring lenders to consider landlord costs associated with letting properties, including tax, and verifying incomes if earnings were to be used to support a loan.
The Bank is also alert to tax changes, to see if they will have an impact. From 2017 tax relief for buy to let will be reduced to a flat rate of 20% compared with the current 40% or 45%, while an extra 3% has been added to stamp duty on buy-to-let purchases. Some lenders are already making changes to their borrowing terms.
In June 2014, the Bank intervened in the residential mortgage market, barring lenders from granting more than 15% of their mortgages to customers needing to borrow four-and-half times their income.
The latest setback on the housebuilding front (UK construction at weakest level for four years as housebuilding stalls, theguardian.com, 11 November) is seen by some commentators as a sign of the doom and gloom about to engulf the post-Brexit economy. It is also argued that the prospect of controlling our borders will serve only to deepen this gloom. I totally disagree.
The truth is that no government in recent decades has built enough homes. But with post-Brexit interest rates being at the level they are, the prime minister has a mega opportunity to reverse this trend, thereby paving the way for progress on three fronts: boosting the supply of housing to buy or rent, initiating a serious programme of welfare reform, and meeting voters’ wishes for lower immigration.
Here’s how. A first necessary move is to deliver to housing associations the land and resources they need to get building. As a second move, this needs to link into a skills acquisition strategy. A handful of skills providers are now offering boutique apprenticeship courses in bricklaying, plumbing, carpentry and so on, which take just 10 weeks to complete. Were Mrs May to extend this provision – promoting it as a serious option for young people leaving school as well as prisoners on short sentences – she would find in no time that she has all but plugged the skills shortages in the building trades. Crucially she will have done so without needing to recruit from overseas. Thousands of young workers would be equipped with the skills they need to earn decent wage packets, rather than draw benefit.
What better way of putting working-class families in the driving seat of post-Brexit Britain, than by so acting to give a generation of youngsters a foot in the door?
Frank Field MP
Labour, Birkenhead
• To set against the present reality of Polly Toynbee (Only a decrepit society would deprive families of a home, 15 November), there is some sign of imminent breakthrough when the Sun warns on 4 November that the housing crisis is the one thing Labour “could use to claw itself back into power” and elsewhere Sajid Javid admits that the big developers have a stranglehold over (land) supply and are sitting on land banks delaying build-out. All it will take is for John McDonnell, a member of the Labour Land Campaign, to steam in with a land value tax to push all available land on to the market and into the bargain the decrepit Conservative party is finished.
David Reed
Northampton
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
A landmark review of the housing crisis in Britain backed by Labour and led by the boss of one of the country’s biggest housebuilders has been criticised for downplaying the lack of homes being constructed by property companies.
The housing charity Shelter said a “drastic shortage” of affordable homes was the biggest factor behind a slump in home ownership, while Aldermore, the mortgage lender, accused the Redfern review of bypassing the issue of supply.
The government wants 200,000 new homes to be built each year in England, but this target has not been met for years. Just 139,030 were completed in the year to June 2016, according to the Office for National Statistics.
However, the review, led by Pete Redfern, chief executive of housebuilder Taylor Wimpey, claimed the biggest drivers behind the decline in home ownership since the financial crisis were a fall in real incomes for potential first-time buyers, and banks tightening their mortgage lending. The review claimed that increasing housing supply “does not directly improve the home ownership rate” and will not solve the crisis.
In response, Campbell Robb, Shelter’s chief executive, said: “We should be under no illusion that the biggest factor driving our housing crisis is the drastic shortage of affordable homes. The government is, sadly, set to miss its million homes target for 2020, but if implemented quickly there are reforms that can plug the gap and finally build the homes all those struggling to keep up with sky-high housing costs are crying out for.
“With the autumn statement and a homebuilding white paper approaching, we hope the new government will seize the opportunity to make serious commitments to homebuilding and resolve this historic crisis.”
Charles Haresnape, managing director for mortgages at Aldermore, added: “To diminish the role that decades of housing undersupply has had on prices and a market where our own research has found that almost a quarter of respondents were not planning to ever own a house is to bypass the major issue most see in the industry.
“Yesterday’s CML [Council of Mortgage Lenders] data showed that mortgage affordability is at a historic low for those lucky enough to make it on to the property ladder. But competition for affordable properties means that many lose out.”
The shadow housing minister, John Healey, who commissioned the review, said it was an “unprecedented analysis” of the housing market – including expert submissions from a wide range of relevant organisations. It found that home ownership in England had fallen from 70.9% in 2003 to 63.6% today, with a dramatic drop from 58.6% to 36.7% among those aged between 25 and 34.
Asked whether housebuilders had a duty to solve the housing crisis, Redfern said they had a “reasonable duty not to be part of the problem” and that property developers had an interest in growing home ownership because it boosted sales.
But he warned against simply building more homes for first-time buyers, saying it was important to keep a “broad base” of supply, pointing to the collapse in the price of city centre apartments during the financial crisis after a rush of development before 2008. “You end up with the wrong product in the wrong place at the wrong time,” he said.
The thinktank ResPublica will on Thursday call for the government to solve the housing crisis by launching a national housing fund, which will be backed with £100bn over 10 years and build up to 75,000 homes a year.
The Qatari royal family’s property company has won approval to turn the US embassy in London into a luxury hotel.
Westminster council agreed Qatari Diar Real Estate’s plan for the Grade II-listed building in Grosvenor Square, Mayfair, on Tuesday. The nine floors, three of which are underground, will include up to 137 hotel rooms, shops, restaurants and bars.
The US state department agreed to sell the building to Qatari Diar in 2009 to fund a new embassy in the Nine Elms regeneration project south of the Thames. Estimates put the Grosvenor Square site’s value at £500m before it was made a listed building, which would have reduced the value because of restrictions on development.
Qatari Diar, part of the Qatari Investment Authority, has snapped up several high-profile London properties including the former Chelsea barracks, the former Olympic athletes’ village and most of Canary Wharf. Qatari investment interests also own Harrods and substantial stakes in Heathrow airport, Sainsbury’s, Barclays Bank and IAG, the parent company of British Airways. 
Grosvenor Square has housed the US embassy since 1938, and during the second world war the square was known as Little America because it was Gen Dwight D Eisenhower’s headquarters and other US operations were based there. The current embassy, topped by a gilded bald eagle with a wingspan of more than 11 metres, opened in 1960 and was designed by the Finnish-American modernist Eero Saarinen.
In March 1968, the embassy was the focal point for protest against the Vietnam war and was besieged by 10,000 demonstrators. After protesters broke through police lines, 200 were arrested and 50 people were treated in hospital.
The opening of the new US embassy near Battersea power station, in south London, has been delayed and will take place during the presidency of Donald Trump, not Barack Obama’s as planned. Work was meant to finish in late 2016 but it is now scheduled for completion in spring 2017.
What becomes of a teenage runaway? Fifteen-year-old Arthur Heeler-Frood, from Axminster in Devon, left his home in September, leaving his parents a measured note of apology, explaining: “I have run away because I am bored of my life”, with instructions on where to find his school uniform (“in a bin bag in a small barn in the field on the green down the road near Membury church”).
Two months on, his parents made a public appeal on ITV’s this Morning. It worked. On Monday, he was spotted at Honiton railway station, 10 miles from his home and taken in by the police. He’d been sleeping rough as far away as London and Birmingham, and has since issued an apology to the police, and society as a whole.
Which is a rare spot of positivity in the pitch-dark world of missing persons. No harm appears to have been done to Heeler-Frood’s person, but his Google profile is in tatters. Unless he wins a reality show of a notability-standard equivalent to or higher than The Voice, employers will always mark his CV with “missing boy”. And as of now, there is still no legal mechanism to hide those results. Has he succeeded in making life less boring at the cost of his future employment prospects?
“The EU’s ‘right to be forgotten’ only extends to removing information in breach of the Data Protection Act or excessive unsubstantiated comment,” explains Roz Sheldon, managing partner of online reputation firm Igniyte. “So there is absolutely no obligation – or reason – for any of these articles to disappear.”
But employment expert Trevor Gilbert OBE, of Trevor Gilbert & Associates, suggests that even with a single headline hanging over your online life, the simple passage of time will draw enough of a shroud over events. “If he settles down to his studies now, if he goes to university – that’s six years. And if this is indeed a blip, then it will appear as that. So long as he has shown application elsewhere.”
Adam Nicholl, marketing director of recruitment agency Randstad UK, goes further. “To be honest with you, I think this shows a bright, creative, resourceful, independent soul who has grown up faster than your average 15-year-old. It reminded me of the case of Stephen Fry, who did a similar thing at a similar age, though I think he also maxed out his parents’ credit cards. What boardroom wouldn’t want Stephen Fry?”
In fact, emphasising a get-up-and-go spirit seems to have been part of the boy’s motivation. “In a way, he is thinking of this as a gap year early,” Heeler-Frood’s dad Jeremy told ITV last week. The “early gap year” – a Duke Of Edinburgh Award-style CV-fillip you should not try at home.
Morrisons has extended its relationship with Amazon, enabling customers to order their weekly grocery shop for delivery within an hour in London and Hertfordshire.
The announcement of the new service for Amazon’s Prime Now members sent shares in Ocado, the online grocery specialist which supports Morrisons’ website, down by 8.5% at the end of the day.
Morrisons began supplying goods from its central warehouse to Amazon in June and already offers thousands of products via the US company’s Fresh grocery delivery service, which currently only operates in London.
Under the Prime Now service, which will be called Morrisons at Amazon, orders will be picked at a local Morrisons store by the supermarket’s staff then collected and delivered by Amazon either within one hour for £6.99 or in a two-hour slot for free in selected areas of London and Hertfordshire.
Mariangela Marseglia, the director of Prime Now EU, said the deal would add 10,000 items to its ultra-fast delivery service.
David Potts, the chief executive of Morrisons, said: “As foodmaker and shopkeeper, we have unique skills to help build a broader new Morrisons through capital-light growth. Morrisons at Amazon is another exciting joint opportunity and makes Morrisons’ good quality, great value-for-money products available to even more customers.”
He said the Amazon deal would contribute towards Morrisons’ target of generating £50m to £100m in additional profits from online, wholesaling, manufacturing and services.
Morrisons shares closed down 1.5% on Wednesday, but improved trading since the arrival of Potts in March last year and canny wholesale deals with Amazon and petrol forecourts operator Motor Fuel Group have helped drive a 50% rise in the supermarket’s share price this year.
Earlier this month, the Bradford-based chain reported a 1.6% rise in sales, excluding fuel, at established stores for the 13 weeks to 30 October – well ahead of bigger rivals Sainsbury’s and Asda.
Ocado has handled the distribution network and IT behind Morrison’s website since it launched in 2014. It delivers in north London and most of the rest of England but not East Anglia, the north-east or Scotland.
This year the two companies agreed to jointly develop a new distribution centre in Erith, south London, and a new IT system to allow the supermarket to serve online shoppers from its stores. Both arrangements are intended to help Morrisons extend its delivery network as it tries to tap into the fast growing online market as shoppers switch away from traditional supermarkets. But the new Ocado warehouse will not open until 2018 and the store-picking system will not start being tested until next year.
The agreement with Amazon gives Morrisons a headstart on delivering groceries from its stores, potentially boosting sales.
While only available in limited locations initially, Amazon has a history of rolling out successful services relatively quickly. Prime Now launched in London in June 2015 and is now available Surrey, Birmingham, Newcastle, Manchester, Leeds, Liverpool, Portsmouth, South Yorkshire and Glasgow as well as parts of London and Hertfordshire.
Bruno Monteyne, an analyst at Bernstein Research, said: “It’s unclear at this stage what the deal means for the prospect of in-store picking with Ocado, but it will certainly give Morrisons much better negotiation power in the discussions. It should also improve the bargaining position for any other retailer looking to sign a deal with Ocado.”
Ocado said it was making good progress with developing its new distribution centre in Erith and store pick model for Morrisons. “Although we are not aware of the details, we have been assured by Morrisons that they acknowledge and respect the exclusivity provisions in our agreement, which oblige Morrisons to operate their online grocery business only through the Ocado arrangements,” a spokesperson for Ocado said.
Clive Black, at Morrisons’ broker Shore Capital, said: “We believe this announcement suggests that Morrisons’ initial experiences with Amazon (and vice versa) have been encouraging, whilst the store-based retailer’s broader ambitions and capabilities online appear to be extending … If successful, it could also catapult Morrison’s access to the convenience market where it has no physical presence.”
However, Monteyne said Morrisons would only be supplying Amazon via an extension of its wholesale agreement so the US company would be able to set prices. “Without being able to control pricing this puts a material risk on the Morrisons brand and the risk of Amazon undercutting Morrisons’ offer,” he said.
Morrisons’ tie-up with Amazon brings it up to speed with the trend towards ever faster online grocery deliveries. Amazon kicked off the race last year when it launched Prime Now, a one-hour delivery service for frozen and chilled foods. Morrisons has now tapped into that service.
Sainsbury’s is the only other major grocery retailer to offer one-hour delivery. The London-based chain has developed an app called Chop Chop, through which shoppers can order up to 20 items to be delivered by bicycle.
Ocado offers same-day delivery if time slots are available, while Tesco is testing same-day deliveries. Asda offers a same-day “click and collect” service, but its fastest delivery arrives the day after ordering.
Ticket touts are bracing for an inquiry by HM Revenue & Customs into their tax affairs, after MPs announced a full-blown investigation into the controversial industry.
The Department for Culture, Media and Sport select committee said it had heard “disturbing” evidence about the close relationship between touts and ticket resale websites during an evidence session this week.
The committee said it believed a fuller investigation into the whole area of ticketing was needed. “The committee intends to write to the secretary of state urging her to study the submitted evidence regarding the under-reporting of income by known touts, and to raise this with HMRC as an area which warrants their investigation.”
It said evidence from security consultant Reg Walker, who said touts’ company accounts often did not match up to the sales they made via secondary websites such as StubHub and Viagogo, suggested a tax inquiry was also needed.
A spokesman for FanFair Alliance, which campaigns against ticketing abuse, said: “This is fantastic news for all UK music fans and those who have campaigned so long for action.
“The dysfunctional market and bad practices of the big four secondary ticketing websites were laid bare before members of the culture, media and sport committee. We anticipate that a fuller investigation of this market will lead to much-needed reform.
“The FanFair Alliance fully supports further actions into the fraudulent activities of online ticket touts and the industrial abuse of this market, as well as an amendment to the digital economy bill to ban the misuse of bots.”
The committee initially intended to look into touts’ use of automated software known as “bots” to harvest tickets at the expense of genuine fans, in order to make a profit by reselling them at a mark-up.
But it said the evidence session, which included allegations that ticket firms were colluding with touts, had convinced committee members that a broader investigation was needed.
“The evidence session … has shed a light on much more far-ranging and disturbing factors in the market, including clear indications of too close relationships between those selling tickets on the primary market and sellers on the secondary market,” said the committee.
“Witnesses’ failure to give satisfactory answers to the committee’s questions about where companies’ main profits are made, the possibility of even Chinese walls between parts of the same company, and the willingness of the ticket selling companies to even try to identify, let alone bar, large-scale ticket touts and fraudulent sellers have led us to conclude that a fuller investigation of the whole area of ticketing is needed.”
Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, plans to chair a round table discussion about ticket abuse this month, while the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) is due to conclude its investigation into whether ticket touts are breaking consumer protection laws.
In the meantime, the committee will recommend the use of bots be banned, weeks after member Nigel Adams, MP for Selby and Ainsty in North Yorkshire, proposed that touts who used them should face prison sentences.
The committee said it would decide how to proceed after the CMA’s report had been published.
One of Britain’s biggest housebuilders has started cutting prices on some of its most expensive London homes because of waning demand at the top end of the market.
Barratt Developments said that although overall market conditions were healthy, it was proving more difficult to sell homes priced above £1m in the capital because of too much supply.
David Thomas, Barratt’s chief executive, said: “Market conditions in London at higher selling prices remain more challenging. To mitigate these risks we have taken pricing action on a number of our sites in London.”
Activity at the top end of the London housing market has fallen since the then chancellor, George Osborne, overhauled stamp duty in December 2014.
Buyers have been deterred by the higher upfront costs of homes priced at more than £936,000, and sentiment has not been helped by the uncertainty surrounding the UK’s Brexit vote. Recently, estate agent Strutt & Parker reported that the number of sales in prime parts of central London had fallen by 47% between the summers of 2015 and 2016.
Barratt has 385 sites in the UK, about 20 of which are in London, with six or seven classed as higher-end in the capital. Thomas said the company was lowering prices by about 5% to 10% on a few of its most expensive, centrally located London sites in zones one and two.
He said that in another move to “de-risk” its London portfolio, Barratt had exchanged on a “build and sale” agreement, selling a whole development of 39 apartments for £47m. Under such an arrangement, a housebuilder would sell at a reduced price, but avoid the cost and uncertainty of running show homes and offices from the new development.
In a trading update for the period between 1 July and 13 November, Thomas said that more broadly the Brexit vote had not dampened consumer demand for new homes, largely because of good mortgage availability and a national housing shortage.
“This has been another good trading period for the group. Consumer demand is strongly supported by good mortgage availability. We are mindful of the potential for economic uncertainty created by the outcome of the EU referendum. However, market fundamentals are robust, and we remain a housebuilder of choice.”
Forward sales over the period rose by 4.3% to £2.56bn, which was equal to 11,733 plots. Barratt said sales rates were weaker in London compared with the same point last year, but were strongly up in the northern and central regions.
The housebuilder said it had taken a cautious approach in the immediate aftermath of the referendum, buying fewer sites than usual for the time of year, but it was on track to meet its full-year targets for land ownership.
Earlier in November, rival builder Persimmon said it had seen “encouraging” trading since the referendum and activity had risen in autumn, but added that uncertainty after the Brexit vote had made it cautious about purchasing new land.
Thomas said Barratt was taking a “business as usual” approach following the referendum. “[The UK is] not building enough homes, so there is an opportunity for us to increase building and housing supply,” he added.
Some developers have offered incentives to buyers of prime London flats, with Barratt meeting stamp duty costs on some of its high-end properties, and giving rental guarantees to investors.
Barratt shares were the biggest fallers in the FTSE 100, dropping about 3% to 469p. Hargreaves Lansdown analyst George Salmon said the tone of the group’s trading update remained positive, but noted its concerns over the London market. 
The capital “is particularly exposed to any damage a ‘hard Brexit’ could cause, and high prices mean that the government’s support [help to buy] is less of a factor,” Salmon said.
Henry Pryor, a buying agent for wealthy clients, said he was receiving calls from agents and developers “offering to help me and my clients ‘take advantage of some spectacular deals’.”
“It’s as if the Christmas sales have come early this year,” he said. “Developers of new-build properties have momentum, they have stock that will be ready come what may and they will be thinking very hard now about what they can do other than to slash the price.”
The way Greg tells it, it was like a trapdoor swinging open beneath him. One day, he was a promising young academic. The next, his fixed-term contract was up, his wife was ill – and barely any money was coming in to cover the mortgage, to pay for the groceries, to keep the entire show on the road. The trapdoor was wide open; now it would take everything he had not to plunge through it.
Greg wanted me to hear his story, but I did not find it easy to sit through. For him, it’s both a warning of what can happen to any academic living on casual contracts – and a source of shame. Hardly any of his colleagues at the University of Nottingham know and this piece will not give his real name or identifying details. “There’s a lot of snobbery in academia,” he says, imagining a faculty drinks and some brogue-wearing professor discovering his background. “That one cutting remark.”
Yet it begins conventionally enough, in the middle of the last decade, with a grant for some more university research about to come through. Except it didn’t. The plans he and his wife had made were suddenly dust. They had always been “tight”, Greg remembers, even paying off some of the mortgage. But as an academic on a casual contract, his only safety net had been a little saving and a lot of ambition – and now the couple’s finances went “from the comfortable to the calamitous”.
In a rush to bring in money, he became what one advert describes as an “outdoor cleaning operative” or, as he calls it, a binman. During his part-time shifts, he had to keep clean an entire out-of-town retail park – from the carpark out front to the bins by the shopfronts to the skips and bushes around the back. It was the beginning of what he calls “the humbling”. His PhD counted for nothing; what others saw were his metal litter-picker, and his outfit.
A few months earlier, he had been writing scholarly papers. Now he was picking up used sanitary pads. Shoppers would see him sweeping away fag-ends and lob theirs right by him to collect. Strangers would call him “scum”.
It was humiliation, on starvation wages. He would crawl into supermarket skips for food to take home, keep his eyes peeled for dropped coins. Sometimes he would get caught. Once he tried over and again to pick up a 50-pence piece. Looking up, he saw a cluster of workers watching: they had superglued it to the ground. Now they were laughing. Then they chucked coppers at him.
These memories Greg calls his “scars”. They are not the only things that stay with him. In one email, he told me: “I am still obsessed with money because I once had to shovel shit to earn it.” He didn’t mean it as a figure of speech.
Over time, he took on more work: one day of teaching at Nottingham and another at a rival university. These were casual contracts: short-term, and paying him only by the hour. As such, they offered more experience than income. So he also did some gardening and, where possible, wrote for a local newspaper.
He was pulling five jobs, working up to 70 hours a week. And he was still only making £22,000 to £23,000 a year before tax – below the national average.
What’s exceptional about Greg’s story isn’t that he found himself in a precarious position – it’s how far he went to escape it. As the Guardian reports as part of a series on a new wave of workers in insecure positions, more than half of all academics in the UK are on some kind of casual contract. According to the latest official figures, 45% of all Nottingham staff either teaching students or teaching and researching count as casual labour. The vast majority of those are on “atypical” contracts. Like Greg, they may be paid by the hour to teach fee-paying undergraduates and mark their essays and exams.
It can be gruelling and insecure work. Before talking to Greg, I met Steven Parfitt. After five years of teaching history to undergraduates, he has still not got a permanent contract – despite excellent student feedback and a string of academic publications. A labour historian, he is in effect a 21st-century pieceworker, cobbling together casual jobs from different universities across the east Midlands. This semester, he will be teaching at Nottingham, Loughborough and Derby. “I sometimes spend more time on a train than I do teaching,” he says. Then there’s all the research he must do to have a hope of some day landing a permanent position.
For all this he earns less than £10,000 a year. In five years he has not had a single above-inflation pay rise. During the long summer holidays, when there is no teaching or marking to be had, he relies on his partner for income. He holds out no hope of buying a home or of starting a family. At 31, many of the rites of passage of adulthood are off-limits.
Originally from Auckland, Parfitt once worked as a sorter for the New Zealand postal services. That was years back, yet it paid “comfortably more” than he earns now.
Tell Greg this and he nods: “I had more rights as a litter-picker than I had as a lecturer on fixed contracts. Because at least I got holidays as a litter-picker.” What marks him out are two things. First, he had no one to turn to for extra funds. His wife was too ill to earn much and his parents were also hard up. Despite that, he wanted to cling on to his threadbare middle-class lifestyle: the house, the car, the TV. Most of all, “I craved security. I had to make sure I wouldn’t be cast further down.”
So he would “wake like a frightened rabbit” at 2.45am and get into work for about 3.30am. In the dark and cold and wet, he would clean the retail park. Just before the shoppers came, he would go home, run a bath and fall asleep there. He would wake up with a shiver when the water went cold.
“That was the signal to get in a suit, get in my car and get to Nottingham.” He would park up, catnap in the car for another 20 minutes – then begin a day’s teaching. He talks about it like an actor putting on face paint and striding onstage. “You were putting on someone else who was bright and cheery and engaging. Never any looking back.”
In a timetable that allowed him almost no time to himself, he had one personal ritual. On the mornings he drove up the hill into Nottingham’s beautiful campus, he would put on What I Do by Alan Jackson and sing along. “Corny country and western,” he tells me.
Afterwards, I had a listen. It’s a simple lyric about holding on to one’s dreams that begins: “I’ve been a waiter, a roofer, a clerk / I’ve shovelled manure till my pride hurt.” It ends: “So I count my blessings when I step up to sing / Cause there are so many people who would give anything / To do what I do.”
Neither of Greg’s parents went to university, and now he was doing the most menial jobs to pay for an academic career. For someone who even now doesn’t feel like he belongs in “snobbish” higher education, it must have been so tempting to give up on his dreams and get something steadier. That song reminded him “how privileged I am to have managed to get a job here. To get my foot in the door.”
Besides, there were “a hundred talented people” with PhDs and publications who could take his place. “You’re so fearful.”
Greg is proud of his university, Nottingham. It is one of the biggest and most prestigious in Britain. It is expanding fast – into China, Malaysia and academy schools. School visitors on open days are shown a new £40m sports centre, complete with a 200-machine “fitness suite”. Nearby is a swanky hotel, also built by the university. Last year, the vice-chancellor, Sir David Greenaway, received a total pay and pension package of £381,000.
Last year, this charitable enterprise made a surplus of £25m. In 2014, it also racked up a £25m surplus. Looking at all these millions, critics of the university’s vast “reserve army” of academic labour argue that it could afford to turn many of those contract positions into permanent jobs.
Instead, it gives UK undergraduates paying £9,000 a year in tuition fees (and thousands more in living costs) teachers who may not even be earning that much. Just like Greg or Parfitt, they may be juggling different classes on entirely different courses at universities hundreds of miles apart. There is some evidence to suggest that the low pay and insecure employment of the academics is affecting the education for which students are paying so much.
I have seen sections of a recent private survey of Nottingham teaching staff on casual contracts, undertaken by the local branch of the University and College Union. Like Greg, many of the respondents stress that they give their best, however much it costs. One comment reads: “Either you stick to the hours you are contracted to work and provide substandard teaching for your students, or you put in extra hours, effectively reduce your hourly rate of pay, and try to be good at your job.”
But others admit they cannot perform as well as they would like. “The lack of value that I feel towards me is passed on in my feelings towards the students’ education,” writes one. “I have heard people complaining about the fact that they are paid 10 minutes to correct one exam, therefore they will use only 10 minutes to read them,” says another. A third describes being “definitely much less inclined to go the extra mile in terms of preparing for a class”.
I asked the University of Nottingham how its use of casual labour affected both teachers and students. It issued a statement that reads in part: “In order for Nottingham to succeed in a globally competitive environment, it is essential that we retain the ability to operate with part of our workforce in a flexible mode to enable us to adjust and respond to changes in demand.” Like the Universities and Colleges Employers Association, it also argues that, measured by hours worked, casual academic staff are far outnumbered by full-timers. But the comparison is only superficially revealing: if a casual teaches for one day a week, he or she only counts as about one-fifth of a full timer. The whole frustration for people like Greg and Parfitt is that they can’t get full-time jobs.
Trying to make an impossible situation possible, Greg finally broke down. After two years on five jobs, he fell seriously ill. He quit the litter-picking and, years later, he still won’t shop in that retail park. The teaching he carried on in a state of “permanent exhaustion”. The stress and worry also contributed to the end of his marriage. “I would shout a lot and I was angry.”
Then, after over a decade at Nottingham, it offered him a permanent position. “You’re meant to feel grateful you’ve escaped,” he says. “Then you think: can I ease off a little bit now? Just a little bit?”
I have a doctorate from a great university; I’ve worked on government research projects, and have more published work than many tenured staff. I have been hourly-paid for about five years now, but HR departments have been alert enough to knock me out of the system before I could rack up four years and become semi-permanent.
I’ve been working for three places at once for most of those years. You have three HR systems and three intranets and three security systems, each with their glitches and perversities.
The negotiation of all that stuff – just getting paid is far from automatic – stacks up to something like a management role. But of course this is without the security or the reward or pay being put in automatically. It’s often like trying to play Tetris very fast, and then you look at what you’re doing all this for and it’s three hours one week, seven another, none the next week.
I earn just over £6,000 a year. My pay always just reduces my benefits, which is now universal credit. It’s hard to get by. Then friends and sometimes even students say things like: “Ah, it’s all right for you being a university lecturer …”
We are seasonal labourers, like fruit pickers. You have to email every September, cap in hand, saying: ‘Is there any work for me this year?’ Universities are giving their hourly-paid people less hours, therefore paying them less.
I do struggle to get by. I live in a housing co-op. On a day-to-day basis it means getting big bags of pulses and rice from Asian supermarkets, as cheaply as possible, making a whole batch of something and living off it. I cycle everywhere. It’s absolutely no frills. I’ve got a partner. We would like a family, but it would be extremely difficult. And the idea of getting a mortgage is a non-starter.
The reason I am willing to be named here is because there is little left at stake, not much left to lose; the idea that if I be nice and polite about the situation and don’t say anything I might progress is clearly not true.
I obtained my PhD in 2013 from a Russell Group university. Since then I have worked in three different universities, have taught on seven different modules, and have been module leader for five of these modules.
I love working in [higher education] but, having had a succession of casualised contracts as an hourly-paid lecturer, am finding it increasingly unsustainable for both financial and personal reasons.
I am not making enough money to make rent, particularly in the summer, and have to freelance as an editor and proofreader, which eats into time I really should be using to develop my own research and publications. I am unable to make long-term plans because I don’t know where – or if – I’ll have work next year.
At the moment I face long commutes and/or sleeping on friends’ spare beds, sofas, floors or beanbags the night before I teach. There’s no point in moving closer to work because I might be working at the other end of the country in six months.
Buying a house is out of the question. I have moved back in with my parents in order to save even my meagre rent. The best time was when I was teaching two courses a semester and doing MA supervision – I was earning £6,000-8,000 a year. Sometimes it’s as low as £2,000-3,000.
Casualised contracts do not always pay you for office hours or sufficiently pay you for teaching preparation. You are rarely paid for the hours of emailing and advising students outside the days you are working. It becomes a difficult juggling act between supporting your students and paying yourself.
On a personal level, I’ve experienced serious mental health issues and, while I have worked very hard at getting to a point where I can function, unstable work without a network of colleagues and without any security is proving really difficult.
Three years of temporary contracts have meant that my life has been on hold. My friends outside academia are settling down, buying houses and getting married. Meanwhile, I have a PhD, a book that’s too expensive for anyone other than a university library to buy and face constant uncertainty.
I’m worried that casualised academic labour means that the only ones who get permanent academic jobs are those able to tough out several years of fraught, unstable work – and I worry that the people able to do that are those with considerable financial privileges, without caring responsibilities, without financial dependents and those mentally resilient enough to cope.”
Sam is a pseudonym.
“I got my PhD in 1997 in English literary theory. I worked for about six years at various universities on a series of temporary contracts. I then had my daughter and was made redundant from the last of those contracts.
I was at home for five years with my daughter, then I returned to work as a lecturer at Staffordshire University on a series of temporary contracts including full-time and part-time; my underlying permanent contract remains hourly-paid.
My life is OK because my husband earns a decent wage but I certainly could not support myself on what I earn. Plus there’s the issue of insecurity – the fact that your hours can be cut. My hours have been cut. I have been on occasion quite depressed by the situation.
I was only doing five or so hours a week last year. This semester I’m only teaching two hours a week. The hourly-paid lecturing rate includes payment for half an hour preparation and half an hour marking for each hour of face-to-face teaching. If I was preparing a course I have not taught before I would often spend a day preparing for a lecture and a seminar or a workshop.
I earn such a pathetic amount. It’s ignominious. I feel quite humiliated – the remuneration and the status of the job is much lower than it is for full-time equivalent colleagues. There’s a lack of career progression, a lack of status and not much money.
I’m in a sense lucky. I’m not on my uppers. I can work for little money, but for other people who need to support a family, I can’t imagine how they manage. Everybody is scrabbling around trying to find work.
My husband is a professor of philosophy. He is the one with the proper job. It’s not unusual, but it’s not very good on the feminist front.”
One of the most highly skilled and prestigious professions in Britain, university teaching, is now dominated by zero-hours contracts, temp agencies and other forms of precarious work, the Guardian can reveal.
New analysis reveals that it is the richest Russell Group institutions that rely most heavily on insecure academic workers. The Guardian investigation has led trade unionists to accuse vice-chancellors of “importing the Sports Direct model” into British universities. It has also prompted the National Union of Students to warn that low-paid and overstressed tutors may not be providing quality education to undergraduates paying tuition fees of up to £9,000 a year.
Academics teaching or doing research in British universities will typically have spent years earning doctorates or other qualifications, yet more than half of them – 53% – manage on some form of insecure, non-permanent contract. They range from short-term contracts that typically elapse within nine months, to those paid by the hour to give classes or mark essays and exams.
Among junior academics – those most likely to be doing frontline teaching – three-quarters are on these kinds of precarious contracts. It is highly likely that the majority of undergraduates are paying many thousands of pounds to be taught by casual workers.
The investigation is part of a series of articles published in the Guardian this week about the growing numbers of people in Britain who find themselves in precarious work. The figures come from the Higher Education Statistics Agency and have been analysed by the University and College Union (UCU). They show that within the Russell Group, the Universities of Birmingham and Warwick have the largest proportion of frontline teaching staff on short-term or zero-hours and other flexible contracts. At Birmingham, 70% of teaching staff are on insecure contracts, while at Warwick it is 68%. Yet Birmingham has begun a vast £500m building project, including a new sports centre costing £55m and student housing.
The analysis suggests that as the university sector charges higher student fees and faces further competition, many institutions are getting into speculative building and expansion of their business models, even while many of their frontline teaching staff are struggling to get by. It also raises the prospect of a two-tier academic workforce, with those at the bottom living hand to mouth and unable to pursue research, while those at the top are very well paid. The vice-chancellor of the University of Birmingham, Sir David Eastwood, last year received a pay and performance package of £416,000 – nearly three times the prime minister’s salary.
One-year and two-year contracts are an inevitable part of grant-funded research. But these figures show temporary and zero-hours contracts are now widespread among those teaching undergraduates. University managers typically argue that such flexible contracts allow young academics to gain valuable experience. But in interviews with the Guardian, academics have disputed that argument from their own experience, including:
• A 44-year-old politics lecturer working at three different institutions at once but still earning only just over £6,000 a year, relying on benefits to top up his poverty pay.
• A 32-year-old linguistics lecturer who has experienced “serious mental health issues” and says “unstable work without a network of colleagues and without any security is proving really difficult”.
• A 49-year-old English lecturer who says: “I earn such a pathetic amount. I feel quite humiliated.”
Academics rarely speak out publicly against their precarious working arrangements for fear of being punished by losing hours. Some have spoken to the Guardian using a pseudonym while others have said they have “nothing left to lose”.
Academics on insecure contracts form “a reserve army of precarious and exploited labour”, claimed Sally Hunt, general secretary of the UCU. “Many universities are hacking up teaching jobs into ever smaller bits and shoving people on to the worst contract they can get away with. This is the Sports Direct model imported into our universities.”
The Guardian has seen sections of a private survey of academics on casual contracts at the University of Nottingham, one of the largest and most renowned institutions in the country. The comments include:
• “The lack of value that I feel towards me is passed on in my feelings towards the students’ education.”
• “I have heard people complaining about the fact that they are paid 10 minutes to correct one exam, therefore they will use only 10 minutes to read them.”
• “I am definitely much less inclined to go the extra mile in terms of preparing for a class.”
The NUS warned of the impact this could have on student learning. “When academic staff are demoralised and forced to cope with low pay and insecurity, the knock-on effect on students is significant,“ said Sorana Vieru, a vice-president at the union. “Many students are now taking on unprecedented levels of debt to go to university. They deserve good quality teaching and anything that damages that is deeply unjust.”
Universities are independent charities, but the Department for Business has told the Guardian that conditions for academics will form part of the independent review of workers’ rights to be conducted for the government by Tony Blair’s former head of policy, Matthew Taylor.
At a few universities such as Edinburgh, the use of zero-hours contracts has caused huge controversy and even led to managers pledging to scrap them. Yet the figures show that Edinburgh has shifted many of its teaching staff on to other kinds of insecure contract.
But the lobby group for academic employers, the Universities and Colleges Employers Association, argued: “It is essential that universities retain the ability to operate with part of their workforce in a flexible mode to enable them to respond to changes in demand. The variability in student enrolments on programmes, and features of academic life such as sabbaticals and research leave for permanent staff, mean that fixed-term opportunities to teach, generally for a year or a semester, are made available.”
The University of Birmingham said the figures, from the Higher Education Statistics Agency, were “extremely misleading”. It added in a statement: “While the university recognises that a significant number of individuals engaged in teaching are not on standard contracts, they provide only a small fraction of teaching (about 7%), because most of them are engaged for a small fraction of a full-time equivalent post. 
“Many of the people in this category are expert visiting lecturers, from commerce, industry and the professions, who provide practical support and insight to our students based on their own experience; and others are our own research students, who communicate their enthusiasm for scientific endeavour to undergraduate students through their work as laboratory demonstrators or tutorial assistants, under the supervision of academic staff. We believe these individuals enhance the learning experiences of our students.”
HM Revenue & Customs has been asked by an influential Labour MP to launch an urgent investigation into an aggressive tax avoidance scheme used by recruitment agencies that is depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” of pounds.
Frank Field, the chairman of the House of Commons work and pensions select committee, also asked that Jon Thompson, chief executive and permanent secretary to HMRC, looks into recouping any revenues lost after details of the scheme were revealed by the Guardian on Tuesday.
In his letter to HMRC, Field said: “Given the potential scale of this racket, and the size of the sums that taxpayers otherwise have to pay, might you please consider launching an urgent investigation into recruitment agencies’ tax arrangements? Might you also act swiftly to recoup all of the monies that may have been squirrelled away by those agencies found to have been avoiding tax in this way?”
The Labour MP has also tabled a written parliamentary question to Philip Hammond asking about an HMRC investigation. Field asked the chancellor: “Having a Britain that works for all of us, as the prime minister wishes, means that HMRC prevents tax being optional. We need an inquiry, and for it to be followed up with firm action, to bring an end to double standards on tax.”
Guardian undercover footage shows Patrick Griffin of Premier Payco, a provider of the schemes, outlining how workers’ contracts are being transferred from a single employment agency into a web of thousands of tiny companies to benefit from an accumulation of small tax breaks, and how each of these tiny companies is ostensibly run by overseas directors.
Last year, HMRC advised anybody using such a scheme to notify it to “avoid the costs of litigation and minimise any interest and penalties due on underpaid national insurance”.
However, despite that warning, the Guardian understands that there has been a spike in the number of firms marketing similar schemes since April, when the government closed down a different tax avoidance scheme widely used by the employment agency sector.
Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister at Devereux Chambers,said on Tuesday that “the loss to the exchequer of this sort of abuse runs into the hundreds of millions, if not billions, of NICs [national insurance contributions], and prospectively VAT.”
Field’s move came as Labour and trade unions also called on the government to take action. Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said such agencies were “exploiting loopholes in the law in their pursuit of profit”.
Iain Wright MP, the chairman of the business select committee which is conducting an inquiry into the future world of work and rights of workers, added: “There are two questions with temporary employment agencies. First, is the flexibility used in agencies’ business models when a lot of the workers they employ should be on full time contracts? And secondly, are they just conning a whole range of people, whether that is the individual or the general taxpayer?
“Tax receipts are going down because these companies are distorting proper tax rules with disingenuous arguments, as well as the issues we saw with the likes of Sports Direct, where agencies which employed temporary workers on behalf of the companies charge fees to workers for insurance or for payment cards that allow them to receive their wages. There is a larger question about where agencies go from here.
“These are the sorts of questions our inquiry is interested in tackling.”
The generation that grew up under Margaret Thatcher were the first to start with lower incomes than their parents and have endured an increasingly divided Britain, according to the government’s social mobility commission.
Its annual “state of the nation” report published on Wednesday morning found that “Britain has a deep social mobility problem which is getting worse for an entire generation of young people”.
According to the commission, established by David Cameron as prime minister, those born in the 1980s are the first cohort since the second world war to not start their careers with higher incomes than their parents and immediate predecessors.
“The rungs on the social mobility ladder are growing further apart,” said Alan Milburn, the former Labour MP who chairs the commission. “It is becoming harder for this generation of struggling families to move up.
“The impact is not just felt by the poorest in society but is also holding back whole tranches of middle- as well as low-income families – these treadmill families are running harder and harder but are standing still.”
Milburn drew parallels with the worst-off areas in the country also voting most strongly for Britain to leave the EU. 
“The public mood is sour and decision-makers have been far too slow to respond,” Milburn said, calling for fundamental reforms to education, an active labour market and policies to aid regional economies.
The former Labour cabinet minister warned that social division could cause political turmoil: “We know from the history of our own continent that when people feel that they are losing out unfairly while a few are gaining unfairly that the mood can turn ugly.
“People often say to me that the closest parallel to today is the 1930s. I don’t know if that is right or wrong. But we are going to have a French presidential election next April or next May and the person leading the opinion polls is Marine Le Pen.”
Instead, Milburn said, solving Britain’s social mobility problem should be “the holy grail of public policy”.
A government spokesperson said it would consider the recommendations of the report, which included a call for three million new homes to be built within 10 years, efforts to close the gap in GCSE results between poorer children and their classmates, and a “social mobility league table” of university access.
“As the PM said on the steps of Downing Street, this government is committed to fighting injustice wherever it arises and ensuring that everyone in our country has the opportunity to go as far as their talents will take them,” the spokesperson said.
Milburn also criticised the government’s plans to open more grammar schools in England, saying it would not solve the problem of getting the best teachers into the schools that need them most.
Gillian Shephard, the former Conservative education secretary and deputy chair of the commission, agreed with Milburn’s position on grammar schools.
“My view is that structural emphasis in education policy is not as important as the quality of teachers. I have always said that. It applied when I was secretary of state for education [and] it applies to the grammar school debate,” said Shephard, a former school teacher who was education secretary under John Major.
Shephard said it was time for a major effort on improving teaching: “There has been a tendency to devolve all of those important responsibilities, [but] I believe it is the task of government to take responsibility for teacher quality, teacher supply and indeed teacher training.”
The report quoted figures showing that just 5% of children on free school meals went on to gain five As in GCSEs, compared with 17% of their better-off peers.
Among the specific proposals, the commission called for teachers to be paid a minimum of £25,000 starting salary working outside of London, and a £5,000 bonus for those willing to work in the most deprived areas.
But Jonathan Simons, head of education at Policy Exchange think-tank, claimed the policy would cost around £2bn a year, and was unlikely to improve the supply of teachers.
“Aside from the cost, it is a clunky recommendation that doesn’t take account of the fact that in some areas of low social mobility, teaching is already relatively well paid and living costs are low,” Simons said.
The report concluded that expectations earlier in the 20th century that each generation would be better off than the last have not been borne out, thanks to barriers to social mobility including an “unfair” education system, unaffordable housing and a labour market divided between a prosperous middle class and those below on low-paid, insecure employment.
The commission found that home ownership was in sharp decline among the young as house prices rise, with the proportion of those aged under 44 owning their own home having fallen by 17% in the space of 10 years.
Angela Rayner, Labour’s shadow education secretary, said: “This damning report from the government’s own commission on social mobility should make for sobering reading for the Tories. There’s a growing sense of two nations: the lucky few at the very top and the millions who make up everyone else.”
Susan Kramer, the Liberal Democrats shadow Treasury minister, said the report was “shocking” in its implications for young people’s life chances.
“We cannot go on reducing spending on the things young people need without doing serious damage to our society,” she said.
“Yet instead of supporting the next generation, the government’s priority is bringing back the deeply divisive 11-plus [grammar school exams], while failing to invest in housing, education and sustainable jobs of the future.”
The managing director of the ABC, Michelle Guthrie, has issued a rallying cry to women urging them to reject sexist questions in the workplace and to lobby their bosses for pay equal to their male counterparts.
Speaking at the Telstra Australian Business Women’s awards in Melbourne on Tuesday night, Guthrie shared her own experiences of being underpaid and overlooked in workplaces, despite her credentials.
She said her experiences echoed those of many women in the workplace and said it was why the US election result, which saw Republican Donald Trump elevated to the presidency, had been “a bruising experience for women everywhere”.
“Are we really going to ignore what this might mean for women everywhere on the basis we apparently don’t understand what this election is really about?” she asked the room, which included chief executive officers, professors and entrepreneurs.
“Of course not. And so the question becomes, what do we tell our daughters and sons?”
Guthrie continued that she had thought a lot about the legacy she would leave her own children, both as a parent and the head of the ABC. When she was interviewed for the position by the ABC board last year, Guthrie said she made a point of saying that a “critical reason” for her wanting the job was the importance of ensuring there was a public broadcaster for her children and grandchildren.
“It is important that we make a difference in our workplaces for our daughters and our sons,” she said.
She described how when she became the managing director of Star TV in Hong Kong, she was “stunned at the rush of male executives to form a queue outside my office to brazenly ask for a pay rise”.
“Some of them had just signed new contracts,” she said. “Women aren’t raised to show such audacity, to make such demands, they aren’t told to build yourself up and display such sheer confidence and audacity, to take advantage of the leverage of a new CEO.”
Guthrie said she later found out that at the time she took the Star TV executive role, she was the lowest-paid member of her team.
“Some will interpret what I am saying tonight as a whinge,” she said. “Well, given my boardroom experience here and overseas, I am eminently qualified to speak on the subject. When I consider my own career and the professional experiences that have shaped me, I often remember the things no man is asked as he forges his own career. Have you had children yet? Will you have children? Will you be able to maintain a full-time and demanding role while also managing a family?”
She added that when hardworking women did stand up for themselves, they were often dismissed as “difficult”.
Guthrie concluded by telling the audience that work and leadership was most effective, and children and society flourished, when there was a balance of men and women. Steps could be taken towards this, she told them, by demanding an equal relationship, equal child rearing expectations, and equal access to flexible work practices.
“Don’t feel beaten by the US election result,” she said. “Feel empowered instead, use the feeling to fuel your ambition. Demand equal pay to the guy next to you, and speak up when a female colleague deserves a promotion. And above all tell each other as often as you can – go for it and don’t let anyone stand in your way.”
Kent is one of the hottest parts of Britain, a couple of degrees warmer than the rest of the country even during winter, with more sunshine and less rain. So if you’re stuck on these shores this is as good a place as any to shed your thermals and take full advantage of the balmy climate in the wraparound gardens and on the beach a few miles away. This converted three-bedroom chapel absorbs the best of the sun through the atrium above the upper sitting room and has views over Romney Marsh from its balcony. Asking price: £595,000. Hobbs Parker , 01233 225371
Catch some rays in these properties from South Africa to Florida and ... Kent
Labour and trade unions have called on the government to take action after a Guardian investigation found that an aggressive tax avoidance scheme used by temporary recruitment agencies is depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” of pounds a year.
Agencies have made large sums by using “contrived” financial arrangements to slash their employer’s national insurance bills and by exploiting VAT rules originally designed to benefit very small businesses.
Guardian undercover footage shows Patrick Griffin of Premier Payco, a provider of the schemes, outlining how workers’ contracts are transferred from a single employment agency into a web of thousands of tiny companies, to benefit from an accumulation of small tax breaks, and how each of the companies is ostensibly run by overseas directors.
Rebecca Long-Bailey, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said such agencies were “exploiting loopholes in the law in their pursuit of profit”.
“Not only do these kind of tax avoidance schemes place workers employed by agencies involved in an unacceptably precarious position, not knowing what will happen to their jobs should the company be investigated, they deny the exchequer significant revenue,” she said.
The government had “failed to tackle tax avoidance head on” and had reduced the ability of HMRC officials to do so, Long-Bailey said. “Labour will shut down these aggressive schemes through our tax transparency and enforcement programme to get a fair deal for workers and for the Treasury.”
The construction union Ucatt said it hoped the Guardian investigation would prompt the government to take action. Its acting general secretary, Brian Rye, said: “Maybe with this latest example of what we consider criminal behaviour, HMRC will finally allocate the resources to clean up the dodgy world of employment agencies and put a stop to the daylight robbery carried out against the British taxpayer and the British construction worker.”
Last year, HMRC advised anybody using such a scheme to notify it to “avoid the costs of litigation and minimise any interest and penalties due on underpaid national insurance”.
However, despite that warning, the Guardian understands that there has been a spike in the number of firms marketing similar schemes since April, when the government closed down a different tax avoidance scheme widely used by the employment agency sector.
Asked about the ethics of profiting at the expense of the taxpayer, the Guardian footage shows Griffin saying: “All I can do is explain to you what our product does. It’s right for some businesses and it’s wrong for other businesses. I’ve sat where you’re sat and you make your own judgments and decisions on that. All I can do is present to you the case that what we’re doing is effective, it works and it complies with all of the laws as they’re currently written.”
Griffin said his company has a QC’s opinion stating that the Premier Payco scheme legally helps clients avoid taxes, because it is based on “genuine” commercial relationships between the interacting companies and had not been created specifically to avoid tax.
However, not all tax lawyers agree. Having been shown Premier Payco marketing documents and viewed sections of the Guardian’s undercover footage, Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister at Devereux Chambers, said: “It’s a not particularly sophisticated piece of failed tax avoidance because, having read through the document, I have no real doubt that the scheme doesn’t work.
“So what it does, it piles up tax liabilities in a [tiny] shell company and it does so in a way that the organisers of the scheme know that those tax liabilities will never be met. So that shell company will fold if HMRC ever catches up with it and HMRC – and indeed by extension the rest of us – will be kept out of the tax that we need to fund schools and hospitals, and pensions and social care.”
Maugham said the salesman was “doing a soft-shoe shuffle on what is the critical question of law, which is whether one of the main purposes of these arrangements is to obtain a tax saving. As I listen to [Griffin’s] answer and as I read the documents you’ve been provided with, it’s abundantly clear to me that this is one of the main purposes.
“It is perfectly reasonable to think the loss to the exchequer of this sort of abuse runs into the hundreds of millions if not billions of NICs [national insurance contributions], and prospectively VAT,” he said.
The sale of these schemes is being ramped up despite concern about their efficacy, the Guardian understands.
The HMRC notice followed a BBC report on similar arrangements being marketed by a supplier called Anderson Group.
In the notice, HMRC said: “Attempted avoidance schemes like this, which seek to use artificial and contrived arrangements to get an unintended advantage, do not work. HMRC’s firm view is that such schemes are notifiable under the disclosure of tax avoidance schemes rules. Anyone who comes within the meaning of a promoter for such a scheme who has not notified it under the Dotas rules could be liable for a fine of up to £1m.”
The employment agencies identified by the Guardian as using these schemes supply temporary labour to some of the UK’s best-known brands, as well as the public sector.
Premier Payco, which claims to have 6,000 workers enrolled on its system, cites recruitment group MTrec as one of its clients. MTrec supplies workers to the NHS and a series of industrial clients.
HRGO, an agency that uses a similar product, has a major contract with support services group G4S and says it supplies workers to the NHS as well as the prison service.
Another employment agency called Jark, which also places its workers with the NHS as well as FTSE 100 companies such as Shell and Burberry, is understood to be using an employment allowance product supplied by financial services group Contrella.
Because each mini employment company created in these schemes employs only two or three workers, the taxes it has to pay on its wage bill are small. That small tax bill can be effectively eradicated by each mini company claiming a £3,000 government subsidy called the employment allowance, which can only be claimed once by a company and was designed to help very small businesses create more jobs or increase wages.
The mini employment companies can also generate an additional windfall by charging VAT at 20% but paying it back to the government at about 12%, exploiting arrangements designed to free very small businesses with revenues of less than £150,000 a year from red tape.
Marketing materials produced by Premier Payco and seen by the Guardian claim the company has 6,000 temporary workers enrolled in its scheme. Along with similar products supplied by providers such as Contrella and Anderson Group, one employment agency insider calculates that the exchequer is losing about £100m a year from the schemes alone.
A spokesman for Premier Payco said: “We are confident that we operate within all relevant guidance and legislation, and we constantly review the regulatory landscape to ensure our ongoing compliance by reference to leading counsel, tax advisers and employment specialists.”
Anderson Group said that it had taken QCs’ advice on the services to ensure the arrangements were legal and compliant with any relevant legislation, and that it had offered schemes on behalf of a client. Contrella did not respond to invitations to comment.
Among the agencies using this type of arrangement, HRGO and Jark said they took compliance seriously and had taken legal advice before signing up with any suppliers of this type of scheme. MTrec did not respond to invitations to comment.
Burberry and G4S said they had not benefited from any of the tax arrangements of their employment agencies. Shell declined to comment.
My wife and I flew to Austria for a week’s winter walking in February. We had to fly back to the UK on the advice of hospital staff, as my wife’s aunt had been taken seriously ill. My wife was her aunt’s official next of kin and unofficial carer. She died before we arrived home.
We contacted our travel insurance company, Axa, from Austria and were assured that we could make a claim. We sent the form and a medical report from the aunt’s GP and Axa informed us by phone that the claim had been approved.
Days later we received another call from Axa, telling us that a mistake had been made and the claim was no longer approved because an aunt does not qualify as a “close relative”. I wrote to protest and received a further call from Axa, advising that an independent underwriter had agreed that, in the circumstances, the aunt could be deemed to be a “close relative”.
There was then a further delay before we received a letter from Axa, once again disallowing the claim, this time on medical grounds. We appealed and heard nothing, in spite of two further reminder letters. I asked for a copy of the company’s complaints procedure and was told that my letters had not been replied to as Axa “considered the case closed”. That was last month. Since then, we have heard nothing. It appears to us we are being ignored. MW, Hexham, Northumberland
Insurance companies are notorious for wriggling out of claims but few duck and weave as shamelessly as this. Axa is disinclined to explain how it plumbed such depths of customer service. It merely blames, primly, “some confusion around the circumstances” of your claim which led to “a level of communication below Axa’s usual standards”.
Apparently, the call handlers have been hauled in or, rather, in Axa’s words, “given the necessary guidance” to ensure your plight is not repeated. Within hours of my contacting the press office you were told that your claim would be settled in full with the excess waived as a goodwill gesture.
And you’ve finally been sent the complaints procedure with the assurance that the global travel complaints manager will handle your case personally. So it would be a happy ending, save for the sneaky feeling that if Axa hadn’t run scared of a headline, your laments would still echo through emptiness.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
Cinema workers are counting on the magic of Harry Potter to raise awareness of pay and conditions with a series of strikes around the launch of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them this week.
Workers at the Ritzy in Brixton and the Hackney Picturehouse, both in London, are planning strikes to coincide with screenings of the Potter spinoff film between Thursday this week and Monday next week as the latest move in a campaign for the independently verified living wage.
Kiv Legate, from the Ritzy cinema, said: “This year’s strike has now been going on for over six weeks with five strike days to date. Picturehouse strikers from the Ritzy cinema and Hackney Picturehouse, along with our union Bectu are being ignored by Cineworld and Picturehouse management, leaving workers with no alternative option but to intensify our action. We welcome a meaningful return to the negotiation table by Cineworld CEO Mooky Greidinger, and urge the company to accept Acas’s invite to settle the dispute once and for all.”
The workers say Picturehouse reneged on a promise, made after protests two years ago, to progress towards payment of the independently calculated London living wage, which now stands at £9.75 an hour. The pay rate, based on the amount needed to meet basic living costs, is considerably more than the government-backed legal minimum of £7.20 an hour for over 25s known as the “national living wage”.
In 2014 Ritzy workers campaigned to secure the London living wage but instead won a stepped 26% pay rise, which was less than they demanded.
Cinema staff, most of whom are on zero-hours contracts, are paid £9.10 an hour which they say is not enough to live on in the capital. At the Ritzy, workers get regular shifts although these are not guaranteed by their contracts.
Staff who have worked less than a year do not get company sick pay. Longer term employees only get sick pay if they have been off work for eight days. Workers want sick pay for all staff from the first day they are off ill.
The pressure for a pay rise comes as Cineworld, the owner of the Picturehouse group, revealed an 8.4% rise in UK and Irish revenues in the 45 weeks to 10 November.
The company described Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, which opens in the UK on 18 November, as one of two remaining major releases of the year alongside Star Wars: Rogue One, which opens in the UK on 15 December.
The appeal of the boutique cinema chains has been tarnished by rows over the use of zero-hours contracts and low pay. Film fans have criticised poor pay and conditions when they are paying £13 or more to watch a film.
After protests in 2014, the Curzon chain agreed to pay the living wage to some staff and earlier this month became fully accredited to the Living Wage Foundation as it said all staff, including agency workers, would get the independently agreed rate. The Everyman chain recently pledged to move hundreds of staff off zero-hours contracts by the end of next year, although it does not pay the living wage.
Just one in 10 private sector workers may be members of a trade union by 2030 if current trends continue, according to a new analysis outlined at the launch of WorkerTech, a charity-backed project intended to harness digital technology to help low-paid workers.
The Resolution Trust, which is a charity, and an east-London-based “social startup” incubator, Bethnal Green Ventures, will find and support five businesses with new ideas about improving the world of work.
As politicians agonise about how best to tackle the economic insecurities many believe helped to drive the Brexit vote, Gavin Kelly, the director of the Resolution Trust, which is funding the project, said government action could only go so far in tackling exploitation. “We’re seeing ever more high-profile cases of tech being used one way or another to push risk on to the workforce – whether via new online platforms or in traditional sectors. But we’ve seen very little innovation in terms of workers coming together to use some of the same technology to improve their plight.
“Experience in other countries shows us ways in which tech can be used to pool and deploy information on bad employers, cut better deals [with] employment agencies or improve security over working hours,” he said.
Research published at the launch of the programme on Tuesday night highlighted the rapid decline in trade union membership, which on current trends could decline from 22% of workers today, to 17% by 2029 and perhaps as low as 10% among private sector workers.
The TUC is backing the project, which aims to put power back in workers’ hands – including among atomised workforces in insecure employment, who can be hard for trade unions to reach.
Kelly pointed out that corporations have made full use of technological innovation to recruit, monitor and manage their workforces – but the benefits have rarely extended to their low-paid staff, whom unions can sometimes find hard to reach.
He highlighted a series of innovations in the US, including Coworker.org, which helps to unite employees in disparate workplaces to demand change from their employers. It recently engaged staff and customers of video-streaming service Netflix in a campaign to win paid parental leave for its employees.
Another example, Hourvoice, is an app – still in the development phase – which allows hourly workers to enter details about their pay and conditions, and compare pay and conditions across employers. There are few examples of such projects in the UK.
Resolution Trust, set up by an insurance investor, Clive Cowdery, to boost the living standards of the low-paid, has initially committed to spend £200,000 on the project, but hopes to become a home for “WorkerTech”. Bethnal Green Ventures provides intensive three-month support to startup businesses with a social purpose.
How to underpin living standards for the households hardest hit by the wage squeeze in the years that followed the financial crisis has become a pressing political issue, with Theresa May conceding that globalisation has “downsides” and some workers have seen “their jobs being outsourced and wages undercut”.
In the first of a series on the UK’s increasingly precarious world of work, a Guardian investigation uncovers the use of ‘contrived’ financial arrangements to slash national insurance bills
A big increase in the number of offices and shops converted into flats is behind a surge in England’s housing stock, official figures show.
There were 189,650 dwellings added to the housing stock in England between April 2015 and March 2016, up 11% on the year before, according to Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) figures.
Traditional new-build properties rose by 8,860 units to 163,940. But the most marked increase was in “change of use”, with 30,600 new units compared with 20,650 the year before. Of these, 12,824 were offices converted into flats. 
Landmark office towers in the centre of London, such as the controversial Centre Point building, have been the highest-profile blocks to switch to residential. But many drab 1960s offices in suburban locations have also been revamped into studios and apartments.
There have been more conversions of office space in Croydon, south London, than in any other part of the UK, with many of its concrete 60s office blocks no longer fit for modern commercial use. Just four years ago, around half the office space in Croydon was empty – a worse ratio than downturn Detroit – but the area has since seen a frenzy of office conversion activity.
The boom is partly down to new “permitted development rights,” which allow developers to proceed without conventional planning permission, though critics say the result is that many units fail to meet minimum space standards.
The total number of new builds also remains far short of the 200,000 units a year the government has pledged to meet its “million homes by 2020” target. The number of new builds fell sharply during the financial crisis, while the annual “new net additions” to the housing stock is still running at 15% below the 2007-08 peak.
Sir Michael Lyons, a former BBC chairman whose Lyons commission has called for a big increase in housebuilding, said: “It’s good to see that housebuilding figures are up, but converting office buildings can’t go on forever, you do actually have to build new homes. It’s definitely 250,000-plus [new homes] we need, but we haven’t built more than 200,000 a year for more than 30 years.”
The housing and planning minister, Gavin Barwell, said the DCLG figures showed “Britain is building again … We promised to turbo-charge housebuilding so more people can have the security of their own home, and that is exactly what we are doing with the biggest increase in the number of new homes in many years.”
The biggest rise in housebuilding in England has been around Cherwell in north Oxfordshire, Dartford in Kent and Tower Hamlets in London, said the DCLG. But in Sefton (Merseyside), Bexley (London) and Cannock Chase (Staffordshire) the number of homes went into reverse, with demolitions outnumbering new builds.
An independent report commissioned by the shadow secretary of state for housing, John Healey, and led by Pete Redfern, the chief executive of Taylor Wimpey, calls for a new independent housing commission to “take a non-partisan approach to long-term housing decisions”.
The Redfern review notes that home ownership has fallen from 70.9% in 2003 to 63.6% today overall, and that among 25- to 34-year-olds it has slumped from 58.6% to 36.7%.
It blames a mix of high house prices, tougher lending restrictions and a relative fall in the income of first-time buyers for the squeeze on home ownership. It calls for an increase in housebuilding but says that even if building hits 300,000 a year, it would only reduce prices by 0.6% “given recent rates of household formation”.
Healey said: “The shrinking opportunity for young people on ordinary incomes to own a home is at the centre of the growing gulf between housing haves and housing have-nots.”
StubHub and Ticketmaster have been accused of acting like “old-fashioned fences” as MPs investigate websites that allow touts to make huge profits from illegal ticket sales.
The ticketing industry also faces the prospect of being dragged into an HM Revenue & Customs inquiry, amid claims that some touts are not declaring all of the money they make via resale sites.
Representatives of StubHub and Ticketmaster faced an inquisition from MPs on the culture, media and sport select committee, who are looking into allegations that touts use underhand methods to secure tickets at the expense of fans.
Touts are breaking the law if they masquerade as a consumer to buy tickets they intend to trade, or if they fail to reveal their business details when they eventually sell the ticket.
Ticketmaster and StubHub said they gave sellers the option to identify themselves voluntarily as businesses but did not take further steps to verify this.
StubHub said 98% of its sellers tick the box to declare they are genuine consumers but said it did not “police or monitor” the claims and was under no obligation to do so.
Ticketmaster UK’s chairman, Chris Edmonds, said touts, known as “power sellers” in the industry, were dissuaded from identifying themselves as traders because they feared a public backlash.
“We’re giving everyone the opportunity to register but we do have power sellers becoming the focus of high level media scrutiny. So there’s a disincentive to be 100% transparent.”
Anger against the industrial-scale harvesting of tickets has grown, as fans find that dedicated touts are snapping up thousands of tickets for the most popular shows.
Tickets to see Phil Collins were recently reported to have sold out within 15 seconds, while Radiohead fans were left disappointed after their first Dublin show since 2008 sold out in minutes, only for tickets to appear shortly afterwards on StubHub.
Campaigners say forcing touts to reveal their identity would allow artists to cancel tickets bought for the purpose of resale, freeing up room for genuine fans.
Ticketmaster and StubHub told the committee that forcing them to demand more details from touts would drive those people on to less well-regulated offshore websites such as controversial Switzerland-based Viagogo.
Committee member Nigel Adams, the Conservative MP who recently proposed outlawing the use of automated software called “bots” to harvest tickets, said companies had no incentive to act.
“They’re quite happy to turn a blind eye to what could be criminality. Anyone watching the session would have been alarmed by what looks like abject complacency,” said Adams, speaking after the committee hearing. In some ways they are acting like-old fashioned fences and they need to clean their act up.”
Damian Collins, the Tory MP and committee chairman, said he was not satisfied with the companies’ response to allegations that they were not doing enough to crack down on touting.
“They never expressed any sense of sympathy or regret for the consumers,” Collins said. “It’s easy to identify people suspected of being in breach of consumer protection law but there seems to be little appetite for monitoring and policing this behaviour.
“It should be easy to do that and I think in their evidence they deliberately sought to obscure that.”
StubHub and Ticketmaster declined to comment on the select committe session.
Security consultant Reg Walker told the committee there was evidence that touts were hiding their income from the taxman because the value of tickets they sold through resale sites did not match up to the income declared in their company accounts.
Collins said this “very important” piece of evidence would inform the committee’s recommendations, which will be sent to the secretary of state for culture, media and sport Karen Bradley within weeks.
Walker, who has spent years investigating touting and ticket fraud, said the resale companies were more than just marketplaces with no control over how touts behave.
“These people [touts] are feted by ticketing companies because they have such value to secondary sites,” he added. “It goes beyond turning a blind eye.”
He said major touts often have longstanding relationships with ticket resale sites and sometimes receive preferential treatment.
The Guardian has previously published an account from a former secondary ticketing employee that the resale website helped the biggest touts to get the best tickets.
Resale companies typically take a commission of 25% on the value of any ticket sold through their websites.
Music manager Ian McAndrew, at Wildlife Entertainment, told the committee some tickets end up on resale sites without fans ever having the chance to buy them at face value, because artists and managers occasionally pass tickets to resellers for a cut of the profit.
“I’ve been approached by one of the big four resale sites asking to give them inventory in return for participation in the profit,” he said.
• This story was amended on 16 November 2016 to correct Ian McAndrew’s job from promoter to music manager
There will be indications, but they are unlikely to know what is actually going on.
Payslips will bear the branding of a scheme promoter, such as Premier Payco, and there should have been a contract issued to them by the tiny company that is actually employing them.
However, while the Premier Payco branding is recognised from payslips, the Guardian could find no workers who knew which company they had been employed by.
They are, but they are very difficult to find. The Guardian has unearthed hundreds of this type of company, all with almost identical names and distinguished only by a number at the end. But there are no details of what these companies are for in the public records.
Meanwhile, if you want to call the directors to ask them what their companies do, you will need a copy of the Filipino phone book.
Some large companies might know, and they may be suspicious how one agency can undercut another on price, but it will be up to the employment agency to tell them what is going on.
The agency might decide to keep the arrangements to themselves, for two reasons: firstly, because their ultimate client might disapprove; and secondly, if they don’t disapprove, they might want a slice of the savings.
Of the major companies using agencies implementing these schemes, and who have been contacted by the Guardian, Burberry said it “was not aware of the allegations” made against one of its recruitment providers. It added: “We take these allegations extremely seriously and will be conducting an immediate review.”
G4S said it is “not aware of any benefit to G4S” from the arrangements and that it pays employment agency rates “in line with those on offer elsewhere in the market”.
The number of workers in the UK in precarious positions where they could lose their jobs at short or no notice has grown by almost 2 million in the past decade, as businesses insist on using more self-employed workers and increasingly recruit staff on temporary and zero-hours contracts, analysis for the Guardian has revealed.
More than one in five workers, some 7.1 million people, now face precarious employment conditions that mean they could lose their work suddenly – up from 5.3 million in 2006, according to analysis of official figures conducted by John Philpott, a leading labour market economist. Half of the biggest group – the self-employed – are in low pay and take home less than two-thirds of the median earnings, according to the Resolution Foundation thinktank. Two million self-employed people now earn below £8 per hour.
The extent of the precarious work phenomenon emerges as a Downing Street-commissioned inquiry into modern employment practices gears up. Amid growing concern about the social impact of a workforce increasingly divided between low-paid, low-skilled and insecure work and higher-paid, higher-skilled employment, the Guardian is publishing a series of articles on the consequences of the change for the kind of workers described by Theresa May as “just managing”.
The government is concerned that the lack of training offered in precarious work, particularly in self-employment, is “completely backward”, according to a No 10 source. The fear is that it entrenches low pay and hinders career progression to higher earnings.
Meanwhile, 750,000 more people are on zero-hours contracts than in 2006, and 207,000 more people are working as temps, according to Philpott’s analysis of the government’s labour force survey. Some of the zero hours workers may also be included in the temp count – 32% in the most recent set of figures.
“There is something profound going on and all of this poses a potential risk to social cohesion and a risk to the potential for social mobility,” Alan Milburn, the chairman of the government’s commission into social mobility, told a recent event on precarious working.
The issue has also been prioritised at the Trades Union Congress, which has launched a review of the scale and nature of vulnerable work in Britain.
Companies such as Argos and Tesco use thousands of agency temps. Sainsbury is now using 54 different employment agencies for its temporary warehouse workers. The taxi company Uber and courier firms Hermes and Yodel are among firms relying on 4.7 million “self-employed” workers, although Uber recently lost a landmark employment tribunal case when judges ruled that its self-employed drivers should be treated as workers and paid the “national minimum wage”, enjoy paid holidays and get sick pay.
Anxiety about low pay is running so high that more than 10,000 people called the Acas minimum wage helpline in the five months to September concerned they were not receiving the statutory minimum – a 73% increase on the same period last year, according to figures released to the Guardian. The UK currently has a greater proportion of full-time employees in low pay than all but seven of the 22 developed nations in the OECD.
“The rise in self-employment has been hailed as part of the economy’s success story in the recovery, but for thousands of people it can mask some worrying trends – namely being forced into precarious, low-paid work,” said Ashwin Kumar, chief economist at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. He pointed out that self-employed families were more likely to live in poverty, with a median income of £209 a week against £384 for employees.
Vulnerable work does not always mean poor pay and conditions, but while many workers choose self-employment or temporary contracts, earnings on average are much lower. Self-employed workers typically earn about half the wage of permanent employees, zero-hours contractors about 40% and temp workers around two-thirds, Philpott said in his analysis for the Guardian, although this is complicated by the variability of hours worked.
The impact of the changes to pay is not spread evenly across the UK. An estimated one in four of all workers in the Greater Lincolnshire area, for example, is forecast to be earning near or below the national living wage or the national minimum wage by 2020 – an increase from one in 10 in 2015, according to analysis by the Resolution Foundation. Other areas badly affected include London, Nottingham, Liverpool and the Tees valley.
The human impact of the phenomenon is also becoming clear. Last year, a review of studies around the world published in the BMC Public Health journal concluded that job insecurity posed a comparable threat to health as unemployment – and that anticipating a job loss could actually have a more significant effect than experiencing it.
Young adults have been hit hardest by the long-term trend. The proportion of working 16- to 20-year-olds in low pay rose from 58% in 1990 to 77% in 2015, while the proportion aged 21 to 25 rose from 22% to 40%, according to Resolution Foundation analysis. Older workers have become less likely to endure low pay.
The attractions of flexible or insecure contracts are considerable to employers and they dispute many of the downsides that unions, workers and analysts have highlighted.
Deliveroo is a multinational company that relies on 8,000 self-employed workers in the UK to deliver takeaway meals by bicycle. By contrast, in the Netherlands and Germany it directly employs 1,500 couriers, which might suggest that its business model, in those countries at least, is not reliant on self-employment. Lawyers for several Deliveroo riders in the UK are at the early stages of considering making a claim against the company for false self-employment, something Deliveroo denies.
But Deliveroo describes its riders as “independent suppliers” and in a statement a spokesman said this status was because “the flexibility this offers is important to them”.
It is not just insurgent tech companies that use large numbers of non-staff workers to deliver their core services. Tesco, Britain’s biggest supermarket chain, said between 35% and 40% of its warehouse workers – some 6,000 – are provided by agencies.
For many of our biggest brands, employment arrangements resemble a Russian doll. Amazon relies on thousands of self-employed workers to deliver its parcels and subcontracts to companies such as Hermes and Yodel, which subcontract to thousands more couriers themselves.
For warehouse workers who are not directly employed, Sainsbury uses a similar multilayered arrangement. It has a contract with De Poel, an agency services provider, which in turn manages contracts with employment agencies, which then hire staff. Sainsbury says the vast majority of these workers have full-time contracts but some drivers are on limited-hours contracts, something the retailer says it is monitoring with the agencies.
“Like all large retailers, working with agencies allows our distribution network to accommodate business needs – Christmas being the obvious example,” a spokesperson said.
That argument about fluctuating demand is a powerful one for many companies. “One of the attractions of flexible contract options for businesses is being able to meet more volatile demand patterns in increasingly 24/7 markets,” said Neil Carberry, director for people and skills at the Confederation of British Industry. Nonetheless, he insists that the trend is not significant. “There have been claims that the mass casualisation of the British labour market is around the corner for 30 years. But the need to retain talent and build productivity in companies mean that directly employed staff will always be the majority of our labour market.”
“No form of contract is inherently problematic,” he added. “It is about how companies deal with their staff … The key thing is good management, and businesses are committed to doing that well.”
Some of the 7.2 million workers now in precarious employment might disagree that is always the case.
Norma, a mother of three from Rotherham, has been juggling three self-employed jobs to try to make ends meet. She worked six days a week delivering parcels for Yodel, which earned her between £400 and £800 a month before paying her car expenses; she delivered 500 newspapers a week for Whistl, earning about £25 a week; and she ran her own small online business selling cross-stitch craft kits she assembled in her conservatory.
“It was a fine balancing act for the family,” she said. “I never knew how much money was going to be in the bank. If it was a slow month I would be worried about finding extra work from somewhere. I couldn’t make the money I needed in the time I’d got.”
Yaseen Aslam, a former Uber driver, is also self-employed – but succeeded along with another driver in challenging that status at a recent employment tribunal. .
“When I first started minicab driving eight years ago, I used to do 30 hours a week and took home £500 after expenses,” said Aslam, a 35-year-old married father of three from High Wycombe.
“I was self-employed and I felt self-employed. Over time we have lost control of what we were making. There were lots of advance bookings but with technology things changed. We have no sense of what we were going to be making, the prices fell and more drivers came on to the streets. I was getting between £50 and £100 per day before expenses, which was much less. I didn’t have any quality family time and I was busy working all the time just to pay my bills.”
He has found another form of self-employment, again enabled by the internet: trading merchandise on eBay from his home.
An aggressive tax avoidance scheme used by temp recruitment agencies is depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” of pounds a year, a Guardian investigation has found.
A number of agencies have been making large windfalls by using “contrived” financial arrangements to slash their employer’s national insurance bills.
The schemes also generate millions more pounds for participants by exploiting VAT rules that were originally designed to benefit very small businesses.
Last year, HMRC advised anybody using such a scheme to notify it to “avoid the costs of litigation and minimise any interest and penalties due on underpaid national insurance”.
However, despite that warning, the Guardian understands there has been a spike in the number of firms marketing similar schemes since April, when the government closed down a different tax avoidance scheme widely used by the employment agency sector.
Guardian undercover footage shows Patrick Griffin of Premier Payco, a provider of the schemes, outlining how:
• Workers’ contracts are being transferred from a single employment agency into a web of thousands of tiny companies that benefit from the tax breaks.
• Each of the tiny employment companies are ostensibly run by overseas directors, who are based in locations such as the Philippines and Pakistan.
• Some agencies are keeping these schemes secret from the organisations they are supplying the workers to.
Asked about the ethics of profiting at the expense of the taxpayer, the Guardian footage shows Griffin saying: “All I can do is explain to you what our product does. It’s right for some businesses and it’s wrong for other businesses. I’ve sat where you’re sat and you make your own judgments and decisions on that. All I can do is present to you the case that what we’re doing is effective, it works and it complies with all of the laws as they’re currently written.”
He added: “I never like to comment on morals because everyone’s moral compass is different, isn’t it?”
The discovery of these new schemes comes as part of a series of articles published by the Guardian about modern employment practices and a newly precarious workforce. They will add to the pressure on the already embattled employment agency sector, which has been reeling from separate scandals about the exploitation of low-paid workers at companies such as Sports Direct.
Griffin said his firm has a QC’s opinion stating the Premier Payco scheme legally helps clients avoid taxes, because it is based on “genuine” commercial relationships between the interacting companies and had not been created specifically to avoid tax.
However, not all tax lawyers agree.
Having been shown Premier Payco marketing documents and viewing sections of the Guardian’s undercover footage, Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister at Devereux Chambers, said: “It’s a not particularly sophisticated piece of failed tax avoidance because having read through the document I have no real doubt that the scheme doesn’t work. So what it does, it piles up tax liabilities in a [tiny] shell company and it does so in a way that the organisers of the scheme know that those tax liabilities will never be met. So that shell company will fold if HMRC ever catches up with it and HMRC – and indeed by extension the rest of us – will be kept out of the tax that we need to fund schools and hospitals and pensions and social care.”
Maugham added that the salesman was “doing a soft-shoe shuffle on what is the critical question of law, which is whether one of the main purposes of these arrangements is to obtain a tax saving. As I listen to [Griffin’s] answer and as I read the documents you’ve been provided with, it’s abundantly clear to me that this is one of the main purposes.
“It is perfectly reasonable to think the loss to the exchequer of this sort of abuse runs into the hundreds of millions if not billions of NICs [national insurance contributions], and prospectively VAT.”
The sale of these schemes is being ramped up despite concern about their efficacy, the Guardian understands.
Last year, HMRC issued a notice specifically about such schemes, following a BBC report on similar arrangements being marketed by a supplier called Anderson Group.
In its notice , HMRC said: “Attempted avoidance schemes like this, which seek to use artificial and contrived arrangements to get an unintended advantage, do not work. HMRC’s firm view is that such schemes are notifiable under the disclosure of tax avoidance schemes (Dotas) rules. Anyone who comes within the meaning of a promoter for such a scheme who has not notified it under the Dotas rules could be liable for a fine of up to £1m”.
However, Maugham added that his knowledge of the market suggested HMRC was “just letting it slide”.
Meanwhile, the Guardian’s undercover footage shows Griffin questioning HMRC’s ability to prevent the schemes: “That [HMRC notice is] from June 2015 and the company they investigated doubled their size since then. I know that’s not very scientific. I know that’s not a piece of paper from HMRC but it’s relatively good anecdotal evidence that while they don’t like it, the way things are at the moment, there’s not a lot they can do about it.
“Other ways they could attack it? You’ve already got Dotas but [ours is] not a tax avoidance scheme so you don’t have to declare it to Dotas. You’ve already got GAAR [general anti-abuse rule] … We’ve got a series of commercial transactions all of which have signed, legally binding contracts binding the parties to do what it is they’re supposed to do, so the advice that I’ve got is that at the moment, nothing that we’re doing falls under GAAR.”
The employment agencies identified by the Guardian as using these schemes supply temporary labour to some of the UK’s best known brands, as well as the public sector.
Premier Payco, which claims to have 6,000 workers enrolled on its system, cites recruitment group Mtrec as one of its clients. Mtrec supplies workers to the NHS as well as to a series of industrial clients.
HRGo, an agency that uses a similar product, has a major contract with support services group G4S and says it supplies workers to the NHS as well as the prison service.
Another employment agency called Jark, which also places its workers with the NHS as well as FTSE 100 companies such as Shell and Burberry, is understood to be using an employment allowance product supplied by the financial services group Contrella.
Because each mini employment company created in these schemes employs only two or three workers, the taxes it has to pay on its wage bill are small.
That small tax bill can be effectively eradicated by each mini company claiming a £3,000 government subsidy called the employment allowance, which can only be claimed once by a company and was designed to help very small businesses create more jobs or increase wages.
The mini employment companies can also generate an additional windfall by charging VAT at 20% but paying it back to the government at about 12%, exploiting arrangements designed to free very small businesses with revenues of less than £150,000 a year from red tape.
Marketing materials produced by Premier Payco, and seen by the Guardian, claim the company has 6,000 temporary workers enrolled in its scheme. Along with similar products supplied by providers such as Contrella and Anderson Group, one employment agency insider calculates the exchequer is losing about £100m a year from the schemes alone.
A spokesman for Premier Payco said: “We are confident that we operate within all relevant guidance and legislation and we constantly review the regulatory landscape to ensure our ongoing compliance by reference to leading counsel, tax advisers and employment specialists.”
Anderson Group said it had taken QCs’ advice on the services to ensure the arrangements were legal and compliant with any relevant legislation and that it had offered schemes on behalf of a client. Contrella did not respond to invitations to comment.
Among the agencies using this type of arrangement, HRGo and Jark said they took compliance seriously and that they had taken legal advice before signing up with any suppliers of this type of scheme. Mtrec did not respond to invitations to comment.
Burberry and G4S said they had not benefited from any of the tax arrangements of their employment agencies. Shell declined to comment.
Undercover filming by the Guardian reveals how employment agencies are being offered off-the-shelf tax avoidance schemes that could cost the government hundreds of millions in lost revenue. The salesman captured in our video says his scheme is legal – but ‘everyone’s moral compass is different’
Some older workers should see a big fall in the fees they pay to access their company pension cash after the government announced plans to cap charges.
Ministers are proposing that early exit charges for money purchase workplace pension schemes be capped at 1%. That could make a huge difference to some workers: it has emerged that some employer schemes impose a maximum exit charge of up to 24%, which would take a huge chunk out of an individual’s pot.
However, only a minority of workplace schemes slap an exit charge on employees and the government announcement only affects people aged 55-plus.
The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) said it wanted to ensure workers were not “unfairly penalised” for accessing their own cash. Its plans coincided with confirmation that exit charges for people cashing in personal pensions will be no higher than 1%.
In January, the government outlined its determination to cap “excessive” exit charges on pensions, which can run into thousands of pounds. An early exit fee is a charge imposed on someone when they transfer or take their benefits at the age of 55-plus, but before retirement age.
Evidence had emerged that some personal pension providers were imposing punitive charges on the over-55s trying to take advantage of the new freedoms introduced in April 2015.
The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) had proposed that for existing personal and stakeholder pensions, including group personal pensions and self-invested personal pensions (Sipps), exit charges should be capped at 1% of the value of a member’s pot, with a ban on exit fees in future pension contracts. The FCA has now confirmed this will happen from 31 March 2017.
However, this did not apply to workplace pension schemes – their exit fees were the subject of a separate consultation. Now the DWP has said it intends to extend the regime to occupational pensions, with the proposed 1% cap for these set to come into force in October 2017. There would be a ban on exit charges for people joining an occupational pension scheme after this date.
The majority of workplace scheme members do not face early exit charges, but where these are imposed, they can vary hugely. In a May 2016 report, the Pensions Regulator said that one small money purchase scheme reported a maximum potential charge for certain members of 24%. It said: “This high potential charge would be dependent on a member’s age when exiting the scheme and specific to particular investment options. The highest potential charge would apply to members aged 44 to 53 years of age.”
One large scheme surveyed said its maximum exit charge was a fixed fee of £650, while another said its maximum charge was 1.4% of a member’s fund.
Pensions minister Richard Harrington said: “We are restoring fairness and creating a level playing field in a system that has favoured the interests of providers over consumers for too long. This new cap will protect people’s savings from excessive charges, so more of their money will go towards the comfortable retirement they have saved for.”
Tom Selby, a senior analyst at financial firm AJ Bell, said: “The cap on early exit fees for pensions, including occupational schemes, is a start, but 1% of a £100,000 pension is still a £1,000 charge for accessing your own savings.”
And Nathan Long, a senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said that while this was a step in the right direction, “it remains important to be vigilant when transferring pensions, as 1% could still be a chunky sum to lose from your pension at the point of retirement”. 
He added: “There are also hundreds of thousands of people with large exit penalties under the age of 55 for whom the exit penalty cap will not help with pre-retirement consolidation.”
The Big Bang Theory’s Jim Parsons is to play the lead role in Brother Orange, the first foray into feature film-making by media website BuzzFeed.
According to the Hollywood Reporter, Parsons will play Matt Stopera, the BuzzFeed editor whose attempt to track down his stolen mobile phone forms the basis for the film.
After his phone was stolen in 2014 and pictures began appearing in his online feed, Stopera chronicled his trip to China to track down “Brother Orange”, as the subject of the pictures was nicknamed; he became a huge social media star in China in the process. Ellen DeGeneres is acting as executive producer of the film after Stopera and Brother Orange appeared on her TV show in 2015.
Parsons has played Sheldon on The Big Bang Theory since 2007, and recently voiced the central role of Oh in the DreamWorks animation Home.
In his 2015 and, as it turned out, final autumn statement, then chancellor George Osborne announced the government’s intention [pdf] to expand shared ownership considerably, by building 135,000 shared ownership homes by 2020.
Those numbers were ambitious. Since only 41,000 shared ownership homes were built in 2010-15, it represented more than a threefold increase.
Shared ownership allows people to buy a share of between 25% and 75% of a home from a landlord, usually the council or a housing association, and rent the remaining share at a reduced rent. There are slightly different terms for shared ownership in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
In January, the government rebranded grant-funded shared ownership assistance as help to buy shared ownership.
Since April 2016, households in England earning under £90,000 a year in London and £80,000 in the rest of the country have been eligible to apply for shared ownership properties.
A report [pdf] by the Council of Mortgage Lenders in October examined the current numbers and demographics of shared ownership tenant-owners. It revealed that:
Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the last Friday of the month. Follow us: @GuardianHousing
Appetite is growing for shared ownership schemes in areas where many people are priced out of the housing market. But what’s it really like?
Readers report mixed feelings about shared ownership: often it gave them much cheaper accommodation costs, but the fluctuation in rent and service charges were a particular bugbear, and issues that are avoided when buying outright.
For Jessica, the experience has been broadly positive. “I bought a shared ownership flat in Hackney three years ago and love it,” she says. “It was that or continuing to rent a room in a flat share. For a monthly payment that’s affordable I get a whole flat to myself – something I could never afford to do (or justify even if I could) if renting privately. I wasn’t in a position to get help from my parents or buy with a partner so outright ownership was completely out of the question.”
However, in contrast with owning outright, payments of rent and other charges can fluctuate and increase. “The only thing that worries me is that the rental portion does keep rising linked to inflation over time and the service charge is pretty unregulated,” she says.
Jessica doesn’t have any worries about reselling - something some do worry about - because the property is in London, where there is huge demand. “My housing association has an interesting-looking scheme to allow people to move up to a bigger property, although the capital limits means that I’d have to move to a cheaper area if I wanted to do that.” 
Shared ownership has been sold as a path to outright ownership for many people hit by exorbitant price rises in London and the south-east, but for some tenant/owners, price rises have left them concerned over the affordability of their homes.
Helen, who is in her mid-50s, bought a 50% share of a flat in a block in Stoke Newington, London in 2001 and says that she was “almost immediately” priced out of being able to buy the other half. “We kept thinking that the prices just couldn’t keep going up like this. It would be funny now if it wasn’t for the fact I am worried we will lose this place if the government tries to change the rules about market rents.” Helen pays £500 a month in rent, which she said is “nothing” compared with the prices landlords charge for private flats in the block. “The market rent is around £400-500 a week, which would be impossible to afford. I am really concerned about the future.”
She is also concerned about patchy relations with the housing association. “The biggest pain is they never keep the housing officers long enough to understand our needs, and we are always back at square one. For example, when we all first bought, the sales representative promised better and more secure gates, plus bike racks,” Helen says. “These have never materialised and in the end one of the tenants arranged for three racks, which is not sufficient for a 12-block flat, but even those who paid for the racks cannot claim them and they must be kept free for everyone to use. It took 12 years for this to even happen.”
James bought his flat in a particularly fraught moment, but avoided far more costs in the long term through shared ownership. “Our mortgage application went in via the housing association’s adviser on the day that the financial crash happened,” he explains. “Our mortgage provider pulled the 0% deposit mortgage we had applied for off the market, necessitating an actual taxi dash back to the City to meet the adviser and re-sign the paperwork as if we’d actually applied the day before – or we’d have lost the mortgage. Other than that, the process was very smooth and because we were buying a new build there was no chain, which made things easier.”
Although James only “owns” 35% of his flat, he says he has a significant amount of equity in the property. The sale price in 2008 was £180,000, and a recent valuation put the flat at £370,000). The overall combined costs of mortgage, rent and service charge are significantly lower, says James, at approximately £750 a month than equivalent current market rental value of about £1,200. “On the downside, service charges are high in my case, and although I only own 35%, I’ve had to pay 100% of various repair costs.”
Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the last Friday of the month. Follow us: @GuardianHousing
I queued in the early hours outside H&M to buy some of its new range by designer Kenzo. I spent just over £500 on items for my three daughters, intended as Christmas gifts.
I was disappointed that the receipt showed that for Kenzo items there is only a three-day window for returns or exchanges. Yet the same receipt says H&M has extended its refund policy until the end of January, allowing others who don’t like a Christmas gift to return them. Doesn’t this effectively dilute shoppers’ rights? PK, Hemel Hempstead, Herts
With the season of goodwill and joy – and shopping – looming, it’s worth reiterating to readers that retailers are under no obligation to accept returns unless they are faulty, but luckily most will provide a goodwill returns policy over Christmas.
That said, designer collaborations are always more strict than regular returns because of the huge demand, so it is unfortunate (or deliberate?) timing that these annual jamborees tend to be on the eve of the festive season. And, as you say, three days for purchases from stores is a tight window indeed.
H&M says this policy is clearly displayed at till points as well as on receipts. “Due to the increased demand of our designer collaborations, H&M reserves the right to amend our returns policy to three days, not including faulty items that can still be exchanged/refunded within 28 days. This does not affect our customers’ statutory rights and we ensure these guidelines are clearly communicated on sales receipts and throughout our stores,” a statement by H&M said.
Online purchasers (or those who actually managed to buy this range online – the website crashed on launch day) are in a better position as they will have 28 days to complete their return, but still with the likelihood of falling short before Christmas. This might be unfair but underlines the fact that you should always check returns policies in advance. We just hope you don’t end up dressed head to toe in Kenzo yourself.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Construction work in central London has reached the highest level for eight years, demonstrating the resilience of the city’s key business districts despite warnings that companies will leave because of Brexit.
The amount of office space being built in central London stands at 14.8m sq ft across 120 projects, up more than 4% compared with six months ago and before the EU referendum. 
Bank bosses have warned that the industry could withdraw operations from London due to the uncertainty surrounding Britain’s departure from the European Union, with Sir Howard Davies, the chairman of Royal Bank of Scotland, the latest to speak out.
However, Chris Lewis, head of occupier advisory at Deloitte Real Estate, said the figures showed the capital was resilient. Projects that have approved since the EU vote in June include the 62-storey 22 Bishopsgate, which will be the tallest building in the City of London.
Nonetheless, there is evidence that the uncertainty caused by the Brexit vote has had an impact. The volume of construction projects started during the past six months fell by 42% compared with the previous six months, and completion dates have slipped by an average of three months, according to the London office crane survey by Deloitte. Just two of the 40 projects started in the past six months have a business signed up to occupy them.
Lewis said: “Brexit is just one of the components around occupier demand and take-up – the other elements include the broader economic uncertainty. London is home to international businesses and, with big elections in the US and mainland Europe as well, there is the potential for quite a lot of change and disruption.
“London is massively resilient. The considerations around what an occupier does is about more than Brexit, it’s just one of the things in the melting pot.”
Of the 14.8m sq ft under construction, 8.8m sq ft is in the City of London, with 1.7m sq ft in the West End and 1m sq ft in the Docklands, which includes Canary Wharf.
There is also 2.9m sq ft of space being built in three areas earmarked to become business hubs – Battersea, White City and Stratford. About 65% of this space has been pre-let, with Apple to open an office in the revamped Battersea power station.
Labour is to call on the chancellor, Philip Hammond, not to extend austerity beyond 2020 in the autumn statement later this month in order to soften the blow of welfare cuts.
In a speech setting out Labour’s priorities ahead of Hammond’s first financial statement, the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, will say continuing with austerity over a longer period would further undermine the government’s reputation after a succession of missed deficit targets.
McDonnell will say the Treasury should scrap planned reductions to universal credit and other benefits to protect low and middle-income families from rising inflation and slowing wage growth.
“Next week we will see a Tory chancellor admit that he has not met any of the targets in the 2010 Conservative party manifesto. There’s been a change of rhetoric, but the priorities remain the same,” he will say.
Accusing Hammond of being a weak and isolated member of the cabinet with little power to reverse divisive economic policies, McDonnell will say: “The tax giveaways to the wealthy remain. Just as the cuts to the poor and the vulnerable remain.”
Labour would increase public investment spending and pay for much of this with higher taxes on the wealthy, he will say.
In addition, McDonnell is to say he would provide “secure and properly funded support for our public services, providing the necessary funding needed for the NHS and social care”.
The Treasury minister David Gauke said Labour had “zero credibility when it comes to the economy” and only offered a “recipe for economic ruin. Ordinary working people would pay the price for Jeremy Corbyn’s fantasy economics”.
The Office for Budget Responsibility is expected to provide a downbeat prediction for economic growth and government finances next year in its biannual healthcheck, leaving Hammond to impose deeper spending cuts, delay austerity or borrow more to balance the books.
It is understood that the chancellor has rejected further cuts to reduce the deficit and will focus on longer-term business tax reforms and small-scale investments to offset the worst side-effects of faltering growth.
But McDonnell will say the government’s “shambolic approach to Brexit” was in danger of infecting its handling of the economy, at a time when gloomy forecasts about the UK’s growth prospects for next year showed Britain badly needed higher public investment spending.
“They have the wrong ambitions for our economy, and the wrong ambitions for Brexit, which means they will continue to undermine the ambitions of working people,” he will say.
“It also means we will be left with a Brexit that works only for bankers and the rich, instead of one that’s based on fairness and works for the rest of us.”
The interactive bird, set to be the Christmas best-seller, is already flying off the shelves
Tesco and Asda have cut up to three pence a litre off fuel prices, bringing relief to drivers after several months of price hikes.
Asda was the first of the supermarkets to announce a price cut, with a national cap meaning motorists will be charged no more than 110.7 pence a litre (ppl) for unleaded and 112.7 ppl for diesel at its 294 filling stations from Tuesday.
Tesco’s price cut at its 500 filling stations comes into effect from Monday afternoon.
Government figures show that average fuel prices have reached their highest level since July last year, with motorists being charged 116.6 ppl for petrol and 119 ppl for diesel.
Prices have risen in recent months following a sharp fall in sterling’s value in the wake of the EU referendum.
The RAC said that although the reduction in pump prices was “clearly good news”, it has come far too late, given that the wholesale price of fuel has been falling along with oil prices since the end of October.
Simon Williams, the motoring organisation’s fuel spokesman, said: “Retailers should have reduced their prices then rather than making one bigger headline-grabbing cut now.
“This will sadly undermine motorists’ trust in fuel retailers and it’s hard not to see it as them taking advantage of the current climate, which has led people to think that higher fuel prices are an inevitability simply because of the weaker pound and talk of the rising cost of goods.
“In fact there is still scope to reduce pump prices further.”
The AA’s president, Edmund King, said the price drop would “take some of the sting out of the high pump prices”.
He added, however, that “yo-yo oil prices mean that we may see costs reverse yet again.”
Tesco’s fuel director, Peter Cattell, said: “With the busy festive season just around the corner, we know many of our customers will be starting to prepare for the big day. So to provide a little extra help we’re cutting the cost of petrol and diesel by up to three pence per litre at all of our 500 filling stations.”
Asda’s senior director for petrol, Andy Peake, said: “Asda is once again leading the way in reducing the price at the pumps to help the millions of motorists across the UK.
“Our new national price cap … will be welcomed by the millions of drivers who have seen fuel prices rise since Brexit.”
British citizens without a passport are finding it harder to rent accommodation since the introduction of immigration checks on new tenants.
Forty-three per cent of private landlords said they were less likely to rent to people who cannot produce a British passport because they feared criminal sanctions if they were tricked by false documents, a survey has shown.
This means that the 17% of UK residents who do not have a passport could be wrongly denied access to privately rented accommodation.
Nearly two-thirds of private landlords said they were also less likely to rent to migrants who are legally in Britain, but only have permission to stay for a limited period, while 56% said they were less likely to rent to someone from outside Europe.
The survey by the Residential Landlords Association (RLA), which represents landlords in England and Wales, was carried out to assess the impact of the right to rent scheme introduced across England by the Home Office in February, as part of a drive to “create a hostile environment” for illegal immigrants in the UK. The scheme has yet to be introduced in Scotland or Wales.
The Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford has reported that foreign-born residents were almost three times more likely than Britons to live in the private rented sector.
Landlords who fail to check that potential tenants have the right to be in Britain face a fine of up to £3,000. From next month, landlords who knowingly rent to people without permission to be in the UK will face a prison sentence.
The survey results were based on interviews with 810 landlords, 507 of whom had carried out a right to rent check in the past six months.
Two-thirds of those polled said they were worried they would make a mistake or be caught out by forged documents, and be unfairly fined. Only 13% said they had found a Home Office advice line helpful.
Dave Smith, the RLA policy director, said: “These survey findings confirm our fears. Those who cannot easily prove their right to live in the UK, whether they are British or not, are finding it harder to access homes to rent. This is particularly concerning for those UK nationals without a passport, many of them the most vulnerable in society.
“Landlords are quite reasonably becoming ultra cautious to avoid tough criminal sanctions and need reassurance that they will not be punished when they get fooled by false documents. They are not trained immigration officers.”
Smith called for clarity about the status of EU nationals living in Britain to prevent landlords from becoming nervous about continuing to rent to them if their legal position changes.
The RLA also wants to see clear guidance from the director of public prosecutions that landlords who try to do the right thing but are caught by forged documents will not face sanctions.
The Home Office said landlords were not being asked to be immigration officers. They said they recognised that not all British citizens hold passports and a range of documents were accepted to satisfy the simple checks.
The immigration minister Robert Goodwill said: “We are working to deliver an immigration system which is fair to those here legally and firm with those who try to break the rules. Following a pilot of the Right to Rent scheme, we have fully involved landlords and tenants ahead of its national roll out.
“We have made crystal clear that landlords will only be prosecuted if they knowingly rent to illegal migrants and that we will not criminalise those who have simply made a mistake or been misled by forged documents,” he added.
A new type of savings account aimed at under-40s and available from next spring could result in a “mis-buying” scandal, a former government minister has claimed.
The lifetime Isa (pdf), unveiled by George Osborne in the March budget, is a savings account that will allow people to save either towards their first home or their retirement. Those who sign up can save up to £4,000 a year and receive a government bonus of 25% – which means those who put in the maximum each year will receive a £1,000 bonus every 12 months from the government.
Individuals will be able to open a lifetime Isa from the age of 18 until they turn 40, but any withdrawals by those aged under 60 that are not for a first home will result in the loss of all the government bonuses, plus all the interest or growth on those bonuses. On top of that, a 5% penalty would also be applied.
On Wednesday 16 November the Financial Conduct Authority will announce a consultation on the rules it believes should apply to the new Isas. Ahead of that announcement, however, Steve Webb, a former pensions minister who is now director of policy at mutual insuer Royal London, has issued a warning: “There is a real risk of a ‘mis-buying’ scandal as the wrong people take out lifetime Isas.”
Webb said there should be a presumption against taking out a lifetime Isa for those people who are not taking full advantage of the matching workplace pension contributions on offer from their employer. He said that a worker who put £1 into one of the lifetime Isa accounts would receive 25p in top-up from the government compared with a £1 contribution from an employer who was prepared to “match” employee pension contributions.
Webb also said that ministers had suggested that the new Isas would be suitable for the self-employed because of the ability to withdraw cash, but he added: “The hefty exit penalty means self-employed people should not take out a lifetime Isa with a view to treating it like an easy-access savings account.
“[And] people who have already bought a house should think very carefully before opening a lifetime Isa as a ‘retirement-only’ product. With no contributions allowed after age 50, and a lock-in of cash until age 60, there are serious questions about the suitability of the lifetime Isa for this group.”
However, the Treasury said: “This government is absolutely committed to supporting people to save for their future. The lifetime Isa is a key part of this, which has been designed to complement, not replace, pensions.
“It is designed as a long-term savings product which allows flexibility for savers. The Treasury is responsible for policy on the lifetime Isa, along with all other Isas. We continue to work closely together with HMRC on its implementation.”
Donald Trump’s victory in the presidential election could have consequences for thousands of small and medium-sized businesses in the UK.
During the campaign Trump made some remarks he may come to regret when he takes office in January, but his general policy stance in terms of trade and industry seems clear: an emphasis on rebuilding manufacturing capacity in the US and potentially reshoring jobs. This may mean – particularly in public contracts – fewer opportunities forBritish and other foreign businesses.
This will have repercussions in the UK. The US is the largest export destination for British manufacturers, worth £29.2bn so far in 2016. Indeed, the US is one of few countries with which the UK runs a trade surplus, with imports of £26.1bn in 2016.
Small and medium-sized firms do well in the US market. Among other EU economies, the UK has the highest proportion of SMEs exporting to the US (43%) followed by Italy (33%) and the Netherlands (31%).
Historically, the size of the population, the common language and business practices have made the US a friendly export market for UK firms. There have been a few issues, of course. For some firms the litigious nature of the US makes it unattractive, and there are concerns about product liability and intellectual property.
Looking forward, the situation seems likely to become more challenging. Even before the election some SME exporters reported seeing an increased focus from both US public and private sector clients to ensure jobs and productivity were captured domestically.
This pressure is likely to intensify in future and make things more difficult for UK-based manufacturers selling directly into the US. Firms might have to rethink their market entry strategies in to the US or how they sustain their market position. For example, it may be necessary for British firms to establish a US sales office or agency rather than selling directly. Alternatively, joint ventures with American firms either for marketing or broader collaboration may provide a valuable entry point to that country.
Three other factors may be important for firms considering the future of the US market. Talks around the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the EU started in 2013 but now seem unlikely to progress. This means the EU will not benefit from a free trade agreement with the US, and the same is likely to be true of the UK. Barack Obama had already said that the UK would be at the back of the queueto negotiate free trade agreements with the US – in future there may not even be a queue.
The immediate reaction of the financial markets to the Trump election victory also suggests more volatility to come. Slower US growth is likely to have negative consequences globally, but will also limit US market opportunities for UK SMEs.
So where does this leave us? The US is, and will remain, a vital export market for British SMEs. Also important are the network of consular and embassy staff that the UK government maintains in the US. Run by the Department for International Trade, they provide useful market entry points, information and contacts for UK exporters.
We already run a positive trade balance in the US, with many UK companies making good returns. The increasing value of the pound also provides an opportunity for British firms to start selling into the US or to sell more. For the moment, nothing else has changed.
Stephen Roper is a professor of enterprise at Warwick Business School and the director of the Enterprise Research Centre, where this blog originally appeared.
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
The business and energy secretary, Greg Clark, plans to meet energy company representatives after a report appeared to show them extracting larger profits from households than they claimed.
A report commissioned by Energy UK, the industry lobby, showed that the cost to the big six energy companies of providing a dual fuel bill was £844 this year.
TheBigDeal.com, a campaign group, said the average bill was more than £1,000 and could be as much as £1,172 for standard tariff customers. Households on standard tariffs make up 70% of users despite lower rates on offer from shopping around.
The figures suggest profit margins of up to 28% for British Gas, SSE, EDF, E.ON, npower and Scottish Power. That is seven times the 4% figure claimed by the industry and used by Ofgem, the energy regulator.
Clark said the report’s disclosure appeared to confirm his concern that the big energy companies were abusing their customers’ loyalty.
“Customers who are loyal to their energy supplier should be treated well, not taken for a ride, and it’s high time the big companies recognised this,” he said.
“I have made clear to the big firms that this can’t go on, and they must treat customers properly or be made to do so. I want to look into the evidence the report contains and will ask Energy UK to meet with me to discuss its findings.”
The leaked publication, reported by the Sun, threatens to reopen the debate about how much energy companies charge customers, particularly older and poorer people who are less likely to shop around.
The Competition and Markets Authority said in 2015 that the big providers were overcharging often vulnerable customers by £1.7bn a year, or £234 per household, and proposed a temporary price cap for the whole market.
By the time the watchdog published its final report five months ago, however, it had watered down its criticisms and limited the recommended price limit to customers on prepayment meters.
Energy UK said the Sun’s version of the report was a draft and that it was commissioned to show different factors affecting the average bill over the years. It said the figures could not be used reliably to show supplier margins on the cheapest or most expensive tariff.
The lobby group said: “The report is not ‘secret’. Energy UK rejects completely any implication that the report was designed to alter the perception of supplier profit. It is simply a way of demonstrating how pressures on energy bills have changed over recent years.”
Will Hodson of TheBigDeal.com said it was significant that the version of the report on Energy UK’s website left out the cost figures that allowed calculation of profit margins.
“It’s depressing but not surprising that [the figures have] only come to light thanks to a leaked report that the big six trade body Energy UK never wanted the public to see. We need much more transparency. The profit margin for every big six tariff should be published in full.”
Politicians around the world risk giving more traction to nationalistic movements if they continue to ignore the growing numbers of workers getting a “raw deal” from globalisation, the head of the UN’s labour agency has warned.
The director general of the International Labour Organization (ILO), Guy Ryder, described Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election and the UK’s vote for Brexit as “the revolt of the dispossessed” and gave a damning assessment of the establishment’s failure to offer an alternative to protectionism.
British-born Ryder said governments had been too quick to focus on headline figures that flattered the state of labour markets since the global financial crisis. In so doing they had failed to scratch below the surface into a world of zero-hours contracts, underemployment and unreliable incomes, he said, as the ILO released research showing a rise in such non-standard forms of employment.
“The societies we all live in are distributing the benefits of globalisation and economic processes extraordinarily unfairly and people think they are getting a raw deal,” Ryder told the Guardian.
Speaking days after Trump stunned the world with his victory over Hillary Clinton, the ILO chief highlighted the common ground between the Republican candidate’s supporters and those who voted for the UK to leave the EU.
“It is the people who feel they haven’t benefited from globalisation and from the EU, from the way things are organised. This is the revolt of the dispossessed in that regard,” he said.
“And the point here is that feeling, that frustration, that disillusionment, I think is very much generated from people’s experience of work. Their exclusion from work, or their insertion in labour markets in conditions, which they find unacceptable.”
The ILO’s mandate centres on ensuring what it calls “decent work”. But based on its own findings, the UN agency is facing an uphill battle. Casual forms of work more common in the developing world are being replicated in advanced economies – the “gig economy” – as on-demand services such as Uber and Deliveroo grow.
The ILO report published on Monday finds temporary work, agency work, precarious self-employment and other non-standard forms of employment have become more widespread.
On the ground, that translates into downward pressure on earnings, unreliable working hours and lower access to workplace benefits.
It comes back to the “raw deal” that Ryder talks about.
“If you count somebody on a zero-hours contract as being in work that helps the headline figures. If you look at their life you know that it is not the type of quality, decent work that I think we are all pursuing,” says Ryder, who has headed the ILO since 2012, having started his career at the TUC in Britain.
“People want to know how it can be different and the fact of the matter is, it can be different but it requires us to put the world of work and these tough labour market issues back on the table from which I think they have been unwisely removed by policymakers in recent years.”
His comments reflect the tendency among ministers to focus on record employment levels and falling unemployment, while largely ignoring that wages have stagnated, people have felt pressured into self-employment and millions say they want to work more hours than they can get.
Ryder believes the UK’s vote to leave the EU should be a wake-up call.
“If you take Brexit vote as a faithful reflection of the mood of people, it is not an expression of contentment and satisfaction with a full employment, ‘I’m doing well, I’m getting ahead’, workforce. The message is: ‘We are living this and it doesn’t feel very nice,’” he says.
Again, there are parallels with the US where ILO researchers found 10% of the workforce had irregular and on-call work schedules, with the lowest-income workers the hardest hit.
The agency wants old systems brought up to date to reflect today’s world of work.
Its recommendations for improving the quality of non-standard employment include plugging regulatory gaps to ensure workers are treated equally whatever type of contract they have. The ILO also wants to see minimum guaranteed hours, better social protection and stronger collective bargaining. That includes expanding unions to represent the growing number of workers in non-standard forms of employment.
Ryder also stresses the need for more equal treatment of migrant workers. “If you take seriously the enforcement of minimum conditions, if you take seriously the notion of equal treatment ... you disarm and detoxify the labour market worries about undercutting local workers and at the same time you do the right thing by migrant workers.”
The ILO director concedes his agency is asking for a lot. But failure to act will leave voters looking to the “wrong place” for solutions, he says. That warning echoes growing concerns that the nationalist sentiment that boosted Trump will also come to the fore at upcoming votes in Italy, France, the Netherlands and Germany.
“In generic terms, I think people think they have a binary choice in life at the moment,” says Ryder. The options were “more of the same” with an acceptance that inequality would rise further or “defensive, protectionist, nationalistic” movements rejecting the status quo.
“We have to construct something which is different from both of those two poles and to demonstrate, or to convince people, that there are different ways. That we can manage our labour markets,” he says.
“But middle ground between the two binary options requires the hard work of doing some fairly hard engineering of labour markets.”
Furthermore, the establishment must work hard to regain people’s trust, he adds. “People are not necessarily looking to the established institutions or political parties or international organisations, of which I include the ILO, in the belief that we have credible responses. So we have to up our game in that regard.”
Ryder has just been given the backing of his agency to do just that. Last week the director general was re-elected for a second term with support from all three branches of the tripartite agency: workers’ representatives, employers and governments.
Alongside curbing the rise in insecure jobs and the ILO’s work on tackling child labour and forced labour, Ryder is also pushing the agency to anticipate future trends.
He believes the big drivers of change are technology, globalisation, demographics and the need to align jobs and job creation with fighting climate change. All are being explored under a “future of work” programme marking the ILO’s centenary in 2019.
So for an agency that has been through the second world war, the cold war, the fall of communism and the rise of globalisation, the focus now shifts to robots, global warming and the gig economy. But the motivation remains the same and as the world digests the latest political shock, it is perhaps unsurprising that Ryder highlights the ILO’s roots.
“Our historic mandate, and it came after the first world war, is based on the notion that if you want to preserve peace and stability in the world, you have to promote social justice and that has to begin in the world of work.”
I graduated from grad school in 2008, the year of the global financial crisis. Known for punctuality, Sallie Mae, congratulated me on my graduation and recent engagement with a letter informing me that my monthly payment of nearly $900 would be due just in time for the holidays.
I grieved over the thought of making these payments. Then I acknowledged the immensity of my debt, wiped my tears and sent our wedding guests the equivalent of a breakup text: wedding cancelled. No explanation, no sign of change, no happily ever after. Just cancelled.
Wanting desperately to relieve myself of debt as quickly as possible, I scheduled automatic loan payments. I diligently paid my monthly student loan payments for six consecutive years without ever placing my student loans on deferment or forbearance.
I operated under the pretense that if I did what I was “supposed to do” – go to college, obtain a career, pay my debts – the universe would reward me for my valiant efforts by extending a concession. The Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program (PSLF) was the answered prayer I thought would help lift the burden of student loan debt. Or at least lessen the load.
I’ve spent most of my career working for non-profit organizations earning an annual income that is incontestably low, considering that my total student loan debt is equal to the cost of a modest starter home in certain parts of the United States.
The problem with loan debt is that, unlike a starter home, it doesn’t offer equity or shelter. Instead, it is often the exploitative product of families and students’ desperation and the government’s willingness to protect for-profit industries at the expense of the millions of students who are beholden to exorbitant interest rates, hidden fees and inescapable private loans.
Working in the “helping profession” does not automatically make me eligible for help, but deceptive marketing and my own despair made me buy into that idea. I believed that PSLF was a reward for taking the advice of guidance counselors, teachers and family, who navigated me towards this career.
With the help of a PSLF representative who reviewed my loan information, confirmed my eligibility and helped consolidate the majority of my loans into one monthly payment that resulted into a substantial reduction, I was officially enrolled in the program.
Making my initial payment under the loan forgiveness program was gratifying. Never had I been so excited to pay a bill. After six years of two monthly automatic payments of $496 and $392 respectively, with no end in sight, making one payment of half that amount for only four more years until all was forgiven was a blessing …until it wasn’t.
After my initial payment under the PSLF program I received an email informing me that my payment had been increased by over $200, despite having a meagre income. The “good news” was that the payment increase was less glaring than what it would have been if my recent two-income household hadn’t been reduced to one after my husband’s recent layoff.
What started in 2008 as a United States financial crisis had morphed into a 2014 personal financial crisis that offered fewer life preservers than before. I had become my family’s primary breadwinner. I had a child I had to clothe and feed, an almost inoperable car I couldn’t afford to replace and the unwavering audacity to want a quality of life.
Knowing that for over six years I had paid a cumulative amount of over $50,000 in student loan interest and that a program designed to help public servants was instead confining me to indefinite servitude, resuscitated the tears I had wiped away in 2008.
This time I didn’t attempt to wipe them away; I called the PSLF program, placed my loan on forbearance for the first time since my grace period ended in 2008 and resigned to the fact that perhaps my teenage college dreams would have served me better had they been deferred.
It’s every parent’s nightmare: discovering that this year’s must-have toy is impossible to get in time for Christmas. Well, get ready for the Hatchimal, an interactive bird that hatches itself out of an egg. Retailers are warning that demand is unprecedented and stock running low worldwide.
Apart from a few branches of Argos, all the major high street toy retailers in the UK have sold out of this year’s dream toy and it is changing hands on eBay and Amazon for more than £40 over its recommended retail price of £59.99.
The hype has been building up all year, with a viral marketing campaign that kept the species and appearance of the toy inside the egg a secret until the global launch last month. Since then, the fluffy chicks have flown off the shelves, with some retailers in the US reportedly selling out within 24 hours.
“If you see a Hatchimal, buy it because you might not see it two days later,” said Frédérique Tutt, global toy industry analyst for the NPD Group.
National chains Toys “R” Us, Smyths and The Entertainer are expecting new arrivals of stock before Christmas, but say purchases are likely to be rationed to one per customer. Most retailers are no longer accepting pre-orders.
Gary Grant, founder of The Entertainer, said there was almost a riot at one of his stores last week following a small delivery of stock. “I’ve been selling toys for 35 years. Even with Teletubbies and Cabbage Patch Kids, I’ve never known anything quite like Hatchimals. It’s unprecedented. People will drive 100 miles for one.”
Hatchimal owners cannot choose the colour of the hidden toy they are purchasing, and must cuddle, rub, pat and tap the egg for 20 to 25 minutes before the chick inside feels nurtured enough to hatch. The Hatchimal will then gradually peck its way out of its hard plastic egg and reveal itself.
“You get to anticipate that moment of surprise,” said James Martin, of manufacturer Spin Master. He says the idea of a hatching toy was sparked by the craze for “unboxing” – viral videos of toys being opened. “But this isn’t you opening a toy. This is a toy coming out to you. There’s a magic and a wonder in that moment. It’s the whole idea of the beginning of a life, which we’ve been able to deliver in a toy.”
Once hatched, the Hatchimal will learn to walk, talk and play games, as long as it is showered with love and affection. In this way, it is remarkably similar to a Tamagotchi, the digital pet that hatched from a virtual egg and became one of the biggest toy fads of the 1990s.
Unlike other interactive toy pets, such as the Furby, there is no accompanying app. “We wanted it to be a very real experience,” said Martin. “No screens.”
Despite receiving positive feedback from retailers before the launch and increasing its manufacturing capacity by more than 50%, Spin Master admits it has underestimated demand. It has now started dispatching Hatchimals by air instead of sea, to cut a month from delivery times.
Martin said parents should not panic. “There is stock heading to all the retailers around the world on a weekly basis until January. We are not playing a numbers game. We have no desire to keep the product from kids.”
However, Siobhan Freegard, founder of video parenting site Channel Mum, has seen it all before: “ ’Tis the season to make money – and no one is more aware of that than toy retailers. Stores screaming that it’s sold out and tales of the toys selling for double or triple the cost on eBay are simply part of the sales drive.”
She advised parents to relax and wait for the next batch of Hatchimals to arrive in the shops, rather than buying them at inflated prices online. “It only encourages eBay and Gumtree sellers to snap up all available stock.
“Stores may be showing Hatchimals as sold out at the moment, but as we’ve seen with previous festive must-haves, stocks almost always arrive just before Christmas to keep children happy – and the tills jingling.”
Other Christmas dream toys that were near-impossible to find:
The fastest-selling puzzles of all time gave rise to two medical conditions: cubist’s thumb and Rubik’s wrist. More than 350 million have been sold.
Demand for these soft-sculptured, 40cm dolls led to Cabbage Patch riots, with shoppers fighting in the aisles.
More than a million Tinky Winky, Laa-Laa, Dipsy and Po dolls from the hit BBC series were sold between September and December. Large stores sold out of stock within hours of delivery.
The BBC’s autumn relaunch of the show triggered a buying frenzy. The manufacturer blamed low production levels on a shortage of microchips caused by demand for mobile phones.
This £35 doll, which sings the song Let It Go from the Disney film Frozen ad nauseam, was sold out by November.
Forty-seven thousand hours: that’s how much time you could potentially waste on email over the course of your working life, according to a recent Washington Post article. To put that number in perspective, it’s roughly equivalent to spending five years on email.
As the writer Annie Dillard said: “How we spend our days is, of course, how we spend our lives.” And increasingly, we are spending our days largely on email. The average office worker dips into their inbox about 11 times an hour, receives about 147 messages a day, and spends nearly 30% of their total working week in their inbox.
But just because we’re spending all this time on email doesn’t mean we’re enjoying it. When I talk to people about their email habits, the most common feelings they mention are guilt, anxiety, and overwhelm – certainly not enthusiasm. What’s more, research shows that the more frequently we check our email, the more stressed out we feel.
So why do we spend so much time doing something that we don’t particularly enjoy? The fact is that even though we might not care for the content of every email we receive, many of us are addicted to the act of checking email. It activates a primal impulse in our brains to seek out rewards. And in this regard we’re not very different from rats.
Back in the 1930s, the psychologist BF Skinner invented a device called the “operant conditioning chamber”, now known as the Skinner box, which he used to test behavioural theories on rats. Skinner wanted to see what effect different kinds of positive reinforcements, such as food pellets, and negative reinforcements, such as electric shocks, would have on the animals.
First, he experimented with putting the rats on a fixed schedule of behaviour reinforcement. For instance, if the rat pressed the lever inside the box, it would receive a food pellet. If it continued pressing the lever, every hundredth time the rat would receive another pellet. Skinner also experimented with a variable schedule. In this scenario the rat didn’t know when the reward was coming. It might have to press the lever 20 times to get a pellet, or it might have to press the lever 186 times to get a pellet. The system was random, and the rat could never know exactly when the reward was coming.
Surprisingly, the rats were significantly more motivated when they were on the variable schedule. Skinner found that even if he took away the rewards for the rats on the variable schedule, they would keep working, furiously pressing the lever for a very long time before giving up – much longer, in fact, than the rats on the fixed schedule would.
Is this starting to sound familiar yet? For better or worse, humans respond to positive rewards very similarly to rats. And as Dan Ariely, a behavioural economist who studies the irrational actions of humans, explained to me: email is a near-perfect random rewards system.
Most of the time when you “press the lever” to check your email messages, you get something disappointing or bothersome – a communication from a frustrated client or a boss with an urgent request. But every once in a while you press the lever and you get something exciting – an email from a long-lost friend or, if you’re really lucky, a cat video. And it’s those random rewards that we find so addictive. They make us want to push the lever again and again and again, even when we have better things to do.
But it cuts both ways: while you might get something good, you also might get something upsetting or anxiety-inducing. And that feeling of queasy uncertainty is another aspect of email’s strange allure.
How many times have you confidently sent off a message only to find yourself stewing, just minutes later, over why you have not yet received a response? Wondering if your request or your phrasing had been received as it was intended? Worried that you yourself should have written back sooner, said something differently, asked for less, or asked for more?
This problem springs from a lack of social feedback. Normally when we communicate with someone in person, or even on the phone, we are reading a thousand little social cues as we talk and deciding what to do next based on those cues. It often happens that we will start to say something but then, based on non-verbal feedback we get from the other person, think better of it and take another tack. When we communicate through email, however, that social feedback loop is absent. Emails lack the facial expressions, physical gestures, and vocal tone that typically shape our interpretation of what someone is saying and allow us to adjust our delivery in order to get our true meaning across.
This results in what the psychologist Daniel Goleman calls a natural “negativity bias” towards email. Goleman argues that if the sender feels positive about an email, then the receiver usually feels neutral. And if the sender feels neutral about the message, then the receiver typically feels negative about it. In other words, it’s as if every message you send gets automatically downgraded a few positivity notches by the time someone else receives it.
Well that’s all well and good, you might be thinking, but what am I supposed to do about it?
The solution to our email problem lies with getting more in touch with what makes us uniquely human. Overcoming the negativity bias, and allaying some of its attendant anxiety, requires us to upgrade our empathy and enthusiasm when it comes to digital communication. To communicate more like living, breathing, feeling humans than impersonal robots exchanging information.
A recent study done by the people behind the Boomerang email app crunched the data from millions of email exchanges and found that messages that expressed emotion were most likely to get a response. And among those, emails using positive words and subjective language earned the most replies. In other words, messages that encouraged people and expressed a point of view were the most effective. We don’t want neutral, anodyne, just-the-facts-ma’am messages, we want to communicate with people who are interesting and interested.
Another quality that separates us from animals and robots alike is the ability to set goals and pursue them with single-minded focus. As humans, we are uniquely equipped to train our attention on a given task and keep it there – to not be distracted by random rewards or false urgency or Fomo (fear of missing out). To focus instead on long-term goals and meaningful rewards. But right now we are choosing to succumb to email’s addictive allure – and to let it dictate our mood, our focus, and our to-do lists at work – rather than marshalling up the willpower that we know is necessary to turn our attention away from our inboxes.
The data is clear about the drawbacks of living in email. Those who process their messages reactively, nibbling on notifications and multitasking throughout the day, are significantly less productive and less happy than those who process their email in batches, choosing two or three discrete time blocks per day to focus 100% on their email so that they can ignore it the rest of the time.
When it comes to email, exercising just a little self-control goes a long way. Can you go an hour without peeking into your inbox? Can you distinguish between what’s truly urgent and what’s not? Can you say “no” to some opportunities so that you can say “yes” to your priorities?
The bottom line is: if we want to get out of the productivity rat race, we have to stop acting like rats.
• A masterclass in productivity: How to kill email overload and get real work done, takes place at the Guardian offices in London on Wednesday 16 November. Spaces are filling quickly so book your place now, or explore the full range of Masterclasses on our calendar
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
I have recently been promoted to team leader in my workplace. It is the second rung of the in-house managerial ladder. I have been working towards this for a year and finally got the opportunity to get the job. It’s on secondment for two months and will get made permanent at the end if it goes well.
I explained in my interview that although I have a basic knowledge of the in-house computer systems, I don’t have the knowledge that the other team leader or the manager has. Since I have been promoted I have had to text or ring one of them each shift in order to help with issues. I explained that I wanted training and needed it to be able to do my job properly, but I have been told that it’s going to be difficult to find the time. Things are going wrong and I am unable to fix them without knowing what to do. There have been occasions where they haven’t answered the phone and I have been completely stuck, made a call and been reprimanded for it the next shift.
If this continues I can’t see the secondment being made permanent, which would be from both sides, as I don’t want to take the job permanently if this is what is to come.
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
Almost half of adults have not yet made a will, according to research carried out for The Observer by Co-op Legal Services. It found that just 53% had put down in writing what they wanted to happen in the event of their death.
It’s not a job anyone relishes, but if you die without leaving a will, you could leave costs and complications for your loved ones to deal with, alongside a great deal of heartache.
“There’s a common misconception that only the supremely wealthy need a will, but everyone should have one – even if you’ve not got much to give,” says Hannah Maundrell from website Money.co.uk. “Writing a will doesn’t have to cost a fortune and it won’t take long. Whatever your circumstances, it’s definitely worth doing. If not, you risk leaving your grieving family with a whole host of problems.”
Co-op Legal Services found several reasons why people put off writing a will, with 46% saying they have nothing to leave, 15% not wanting to think about death, and 14% simply not having got around to doing it. Other concerns include the time it might take and the amount it might cost.
The idea of not wanting to think about death is a big sticking point, with many people still not comfortable discussing it. “Talking about dying won’t make it happen,” says Toby Scott from the Dying Matters coalition. “It can feel a bit morbid at first, but knowing you’ve got your plans and affairs in order can be a great relief. You can then get on with living the life you have, safe in the knowledge that everything is in place for loved ones.”
What happens if you die without a will?
“It can leave surviving loved ones in a real mess,” says Scott. “It can cause problems that take a long time to sort out, and can trigger arguments that can split families apart.”
The reality is, if you die without a valid will you will have no say in what happens to your estate. In this scenario the law decides – the legal term is intestacy. Under the rules of intestacy your estate will be divided among certain blood relatives in accordance with a strict order of priority, which may not be in line with your wishes.
While these rules were updated in October 2014 in a bid to offer more protection to close relatives, certain groups have not benefitted. Hayley North, chartered financial planner at Rose & North, says: “If you are not married your partner has no entitlement to anything – even if you have children together.” Step-children and step-grandchildren also do not automatically inherit.
So a will is particularly important for cohabiting couples, as well as those who have remarried and have complicated family structures. Also, it doesn’t just ensure that the right people benefit immediately after your death – it can allow you to make sure that a new partner stays in your home when you die, but that your children will still be in line to inherit.
With this paperwork in place, you can also make sure more of your estate goes to your loved ones rather than into the chancellor’s coffers in avoidable inheritance tax. In addition, you can use this document to set out who will be your executors – the people who will oversee the distribution of your estate. You can even use your will to set down your funeral wishes.
“If you have young children, the other critical thing is who will be their legal guardians,” says North. “However, it is vital to have the conversation with friends and family long before this is required.”
When should you write a will?
Another reason commonly cited by people for not having made a will is that they are too young to think about it. In reality, it is never too early. Steven Cameron, pensions director at Aegon, says: “None of us knows what the future holds, so the earlier people start inheritance planning, the better protected their loved ones will be.”
A will can be revised later if necessary, or written to take into account certain changes you expect - for example, if you are living with a partner but think you may get married you can have wills written “in contemplation of marriage”. Inserting this means a will is still valid after you marry.
Should you do it yourself?
If your affairs are very straightforward, you could consider buying a DIY kit. WH Smith, for example, sells them from £9.99.
Elsewhere, Which? offers a “self service” will writing package starting at £99 for an unmarried person and £156 for mirror wills for a couple. Other online will writing services include Affio.co.uk and Rocketlawyer.co.uk.
You need to think very carefully before opting for one of the cheaper DIY options without legal assistance. According to Co-op Legal Services, around a quarter of the wills it sees in its probate and estate administration department are DIY documents. Of these, approximately a third are deemed ineffective in some way. This could include ambiguity in the wording and misunderstanding of legal terms, and in some cases wills have not been witnessed.
“This can result in an estate not being distributed as the person intended,” says James Antoniou from Co-op Legal Services. “It can also have a significant impact on the length of time it takes to administer an estate.”
It’s also worth noting that anyone can set themselves up as a will writer, so it is important to ensure you are using a specialist legal professional who is regulated and insured.
North from Rose & North adds: “While using a solicitor is more expensive than going down the DIY route, it will ensure that everything is set up correctly – and could prevent some serious mistakes.”
If you are thinking about drawing up a will it is worth looking into the Will Aid scheme, which runs throughout November. This is a campaign based on a partnership between the legal profession and nine UK charities, with solicitors waiving their usual fees for writing a basic will, and instead inviting people to make a donation to Will Aid. The recommended amount is £95 per person, or £150 for a couple.
Once you’ve drawn up your will it is important to ensure it remains up-to-date. As a rule of thumb you should revisit it every three to five years – or when there is a material change to your life, such as marriage, children or divorce.
My husband and I missed a connecting British Airways flight from Aberdeen to Shetland in July because of a late flight from Heathrow. When we got to Aberdeen we were told there wasn’t another flight until the next afternoon, which would have meant missing two days of our holiday.
BA said that if we wanted to get the overnight ferry we could book it and claim the money back. I did just that, providing receipts of £118 plus bus fares and meals. Eight days later I received an email from customer services saying it couldn’t reimburse us, but “from what you’ve told me about your delayed flight, I absolutely agree we’ve let you down”. I was offered the “applicable refund due on your unused ticket” plus £50 towards expenses. I started making this claim but was required to agree at the outset to whatever amount was calculated, and that this would be non-negotiable.
I queried this and later received an email apologising and saying that my details had been given to the refunds department, and that I could contact them by letter. I did so, including photocopies of the unused tickets, which cost £172 each. Mysteriously, £89.86 was deposited in my account with no explanation for how this was arrived at. My letter was even returned, marked “addressee gone away”.
The monetary shortfall is not enormous, but I am unhappy at our late arrival having had little sleep and not being able to use our paid-for hotel and dinner. I don’t believe this is a suitable refund for something that was not of our making and avoidable by BA. DT, London W7
Last week we highlighted the leap in complaints about BA in our postbag, reflecting an apparent dramatic decline in its customer service. What is strange is that after initially agreeing that it had let you down, it made you jump through numerous hoops to get the refund it admitted you were entitled to.
It seems to us that the timing of this flight was too tight to allow you to change, and the Heathrow-Aberdeen flight is habitually late. BA explained to you the rather complicated refund breakdown, and although it apparently offered you the opportunity to rebook for the next day on the next available flight, we can understand why this was inconvenient.
It has since agreed to refund the difference between what you claimed and what you have already received, reiterating that it would not, on this occasion, cover the ferry tickets as well. It said: “We try to be as flexible as possible when a connection is missed as a result of a delayed flight, and always offer customers the opportunity to travel on the next available flight.”
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
Donald Trump ran for president with the slogan of “Make America Great Again”. Implicit in this was the idea of making America work again.
Trump was addressing widespread anxiety about the loss of jobs to globalisation, to downsizing, and other factors associated with the economic policies of the past 40 years, and he was telling people that he would bring the jobs back.
Two things about this: the first is that, as a political strategy, it worked. The second is that it is nonsense.
It worked because it addressed legitimate concerns about people’s lived experience, where not only have many traditional jobs disappeared but the ones that remain are insecure.
In fact a 2015 US government report suggests that 40% of US jobs are now contingent, so that “millions of workers … are in temporary, contract, or other forms of non-standard employment arrangements” which have no “employer-provided retirement and health benefits, or … job-protected leave”.
The states that turned from Barack Obama to Trump closely hew with the areas most affected by disruptions associated with globalisation and economic downturn. Pennsylvania, Michigan, Ohio, West Virginia, Kentucky and Indiana swung heavily to Trump. Even where Hillary Clinton won, such as in Virginia, her margins were thinner than Obama’s.
So whatever other factors contributed to Trump’s victory, his focus on jobs helped.
But here’s the thing: the jobs aren’t coming back. And this is why Trump’s promises about making America work again are nonsense.
The structural changes that have occurred – the shift from an industrial economy to one built on knowledge, information and automation – mean that we will never again require the same number of people working to produce the things we need.
What’s more, technology is displacing not just blue-collar jobs but white-collar ones as well, and this is unprecedented.
Even where companies can be encouraged to return production to the US, it is unlikely to make much difference. Indeed, onshoring (as it is called) is already happening, but the factories being built are heavily automated, and none of the president-elect’s promises will do anything about that.
Yes, such factories are creating jobs, but a tiny fraction of the number lost when they were offshored. Also, these new jobs are paying less than similar jobs back in the 1980s and 90s. Bureau of Labor statistics show that: “In September, those employees made an average $8.63 an hour, in 1982 to 1984 dollars, while they made an average of $8.80 an hour in 1985.”
There are certainly economists who suggest that concerns about jobs losses owing to automation are exaggerated and that eventually the economy will create new and different jobs. But that “eventually” is being asked to do a lot of work.
Yes, jobs will be created, but there will be no obvious path from the jobs lost to those created. The new jobs will require either high-level technical skills or the sort of the interpersonal skills associated with an arts degree – everything from problem solving to collaboration and teaching.
Even where people can retrain there will still be fewer jobs requiring fewer working hours, so they will likely be offered on the basis of short-term contracts. Without other interventions, such work will be highly insecure, as the gig economy is already showing us.
Having said all that, it is hard to fault the approach Trump is taking without also criticising his opponents. Clinton and Bernie Sanders ran on job creation every bit as much as Trump did, and so does just about every politician in the western world. Here in Australia, Malcolm Turnbull ran at the last Australian election on the slogan “jobs and growth” and was barely challenged to explain how he would achieve either.
The Labor party’s jobs plan was more credible, and talked about “innovation and more local jobs in advanced manufacturing, renewable energy and services”, but it simply did not mention rising to the challenge of automation. At the end of the day, it was a vision for recreating the past rather than building the future.
None of this is to say that short-term efforts to build employment are wrong but we need so much more than that and none of the major political players are addressing the issue head on.
So this is our real problem: politicians still speak as if a new era of post-second world war full employment is just around the corner and it really isn’t.
This doesn’t mean our future prospects are bad, far from it, but it does mean rethinking our whole relationship with work. It means recognising that a job is an increasingly unreliable way of ensuring that everyone shares in the wealth of our societies.
Put simply, Trump’s xenophobic retreat from a globalised world isn’t going to help anyone.
Instead we need a radical and inclusive reinvention of the economy around shorter working hours; government intervention that favours the many rather than the few, including fairer taxation regimes and policies of redistribution; and an embrace of the new technologies of energy, communication and information that have the potential to ensure an improving standard of living for those outside the 1%.
Oh, and we need to plan now for some form of universal basic income.
Mostly, though, we need politicians who will tell us the truth about the future of work, not ones who sell us a Trumped-up vision of the past.
Sluggish wage growth means the average employee is £3,500 a year worse off since the Conservatives came to power, according to Labour analysis of Treasury figures before chancellor Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement next week.
Compared with the average wage growth under Labour, full-time employees are £67 a week or £292 a month worse off, the party’s report found. The analysis compared the average annual percentage change in wages in the six years of the Conservative and coalition governments, which is 1.3%.
In contrast, the average growth under the last Labour government was 3.2%, though growth fell significantly post-2008. Labour will use slow wage growth as a key argument against plans to cut universal credit, which Hammond is being urged to reverse in his autumn statement on 23 November.
Damian Green, the work and pensions secretary, has said the government will not make any more immediate welfare cuts after the UK’s vote to leave the EU in order to focus on economic recovery, but said cuts already announced would go ahead as planned.
John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, said: “We have known for a long time that the government has failed to make good on its promises to ‘make work pay’; we have had sluggish wage growth and a failure to return wages to their 2008 peak. That’s why Labour is calling on the chancellor, in the upcoming autumn statement, to reverse the damaging cuts to universal credit still planned for the remainder of this parliament.”
Labour will also focus on the self-employed in the party’s response to the autumn statement, with the shadow work and pensions secretary, Debbie Abrahams, highlighting the gaps in the national insurance framework for freelancers or small business owners, who make up 15% of the workforce.
In a speech on Monday, Abrahams will call for changes to the current system in which self-employed workers are not able to gain access to important elements of the social security system, including sick pay and paternity pay, and for the government to tackle the potential pensions black hole because of lower personal pension savings among the self-employed.
“In so many ways, self-employment is characteristic of both the opportunities and the challenges faced by our society,” she will say. “It brings to the individual a combination of great freedom with great risk, an ability to build one’s own enterprise or to work flexibly around other priorities; it can offer great prosperity for some, but poverty pay for others.”
Almost two-thirds of renters in the UK believe they are unlikely to buy a home in the next five years, according to research for a Labour-backed inquiry into the housing crisis.
The warning is a preview to the results of the survey, which will be published on Wednesday. The Redfern review, led by Pete Redfern, the chief executive of housebuilder Taylor Wimpey, has examined the reasons for the decline in homeownership.
A poll of about 2,000 people from around the UK found 62% of those living in rented accommodation felt they were unlikely to buy in the next five years. Among the population as a whole, 49% thought more should be done to disincentivise buy-to-let, while two-thirds thought the government should do more to help first-time buyers. Eight out of 10 people believed buying a property had become more difficult over the past decade.
The findings have been revealed as separate research shows house prices have started to bounce back after a lull in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote, making it more difficult still for first-time buyers to purchase a home.
The proportion of households that own a property has fallen to a 30-year low of 62%. The average age of a first-time buyer is 34 in parts of London and 30 for the country as a whole, according to recent figures from the Halifax. This has led to the rise of “generation rent”, with 344,000 fewer households under the age of 35 owning their home than in 2010, a decline of about a fifth.
Redfern has been advised by experts including Kate Barker, author of a review on housing supply, and Terrie Alafat, chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Housing. Barker’s review, published in 2004, said about 250,000 homes needed to be built each year to keep a lid on price inflation. Since then the number of homes created has lagged behind that figure, with net new housing supply in England peaking at 223,530 in 2006/07 and falling to 124,720 seven years later.
John Healey, the shadow housing minister who commissioned the Redfern review, said Labour was determined to turn around the fall in homeownership, and the review would “give us the new analysis and ideas to do it”.
He claimed the figures showed increasing numbers of young people were likely to be giving up on the idea of owning a property altogether.
“After years of house prices rising faster than pay, many young people have simply given up hope that the housing crisis can be fixed, and worry they will never have the same security of owning a home that their parents did,” he said.
New figures from the property website Rightmove show the difficulties in affording a first home. Although asking prices for new listings fell by 1.1% in November, to an average of £305,670, sellers of properties typically bought by first-time buyers – two-bedroom homes and smaller – were 1.7% higher in November than in October, at an average of £192,147. Separate figures from the estate agency haart, showed a 2.8% jump in the price first-time buyers had agreed for homes. This compared with 0.5% recorded across all UK sales.
Earlier this year, analysis by the charity Equality Trust found 86% of renters – who make up about 6m households – had less than the £8,838 needed for a 5% deposit on the average home.
Miles Shipside, the director of Rightmove, said the overall fall in asking prices in November was the smallest for the month in five years. He added: “Price resilience is not good news for cash-strapped aspiring first-time buyers, and in spite of the more subdued time of year the smaller properties that they typically target have increased in price this month, the only market sector to show an increase.
“In the sprint to get on to the housing ladder, wage inflation to help meet lender affordability ratios and to save for the larger deposits required is being comprehensively outrun by price increases.”
Shipside said first-time buyers needed help in the government’s autumn statement on 23 November. “Short-term options that might be top of a first-time buyer’s list would be a stamp duty holiday exclusive to them,” he said. “However, there are dangers to increasing demand unless this is matched by policies to improve supply, and more radical steps need to be taken to remove some of the barriers preventing more affordable homes to buy and rent from being built in the right locations.”
In its submission before the autumn statement, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation called on the government to invest an extra £1.1bn in providing social housing through a living rents scheme, which would link monthly costs and local wages. It said the investment could help deliver 80,000 homes each year in England, half at living rent levels.
Banks and building societies seem more interested in escaping, rather than entering, the best-buy tables
Philip Hammond may always have dreamed of becoming chancellor, but it is unlikely he imagined it would be in such difficult and uncertain times. The impact of the fall in the value of sterling is only the most obvious of the complexities he has to juggle as he prepares for his first set-piece moment, next week’s autumn statement. The clamour from public services for an emergency cash injection after six years of savage austerity has never been louder. Benefits, further education colleges, and perhaps most consequential, social care have all felt the pain as council spending was cut by £18bn – about a fifth – in the coalition years, and is now facing cuts of half as much again in this parliament.
Nominally, the NHS budget has been protected. But not even Conservative MPs on the Commons health committee believe the government’s headline claims. The impact of not enough money for hospitals and access to care are written for all to see in rising demand for A&E and missed waiting times, where – according to the Health Service Journal – all surgical specialties are now in breach of the 18-week target for the wait between referral and treatment. There are complex reasons underlying the figures, but the consequences of bed-blocking are one of the most important. In September, the last month for which data has been released, 192,000 days were lost by delayed transfer of care. Some NHS number-crunchers believe the real number of people in hospital who should be being cared for in the community is probably four times as many as represented by those figures.
There is now an unprecedented level of agreement that social care should be at the very top of the list of Mr Hammond’s priorities for urgent extra funding. The triple whammy of shrinking budgets, rising demand and the cost of paying the (long-overdue) national living wage to care workers has left many councils paring their help for the elderly back to the barest minimum. Between 2009 and 2013, there was a 26% cut in the number receiving support in their homes, leaving a million people without the care they needed, and the situation has only worsened since: on some calculations £4.6bn was cut from care budgets between 2010 and 2016. Last month the Care Quality Commission warned that services were at a tipping point. The Local Government Association, representing more than 300 councils in England and Wales, says the situation is perilous. Charities, Tory MPs in public, and it is understood the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, and the communities and local government secretary, Sajid Javid, in private, are all arguing for extra cash before winter starts to bite.
Mr Hammond is said to be considering a plan to release more cash in April, or to allow councils to raise council taxes. Both plans may be needed. But the crisis in hospitals provoked by the shortage of community support for older people is likely to peak long before the spring, while raising council tax brings in much more in richer areas in the south-east of England than in areas where council tax receipts are smaller. Last week, for example, Liverpool’s mayor, Joe Anderson, proposed that to avoid to avoid cuts of 50% across the board, there should be a vote on a 10% increase in council tax. This is the dilemma facing us all, not just Liverpool. Higher taxes, or shrinking services.
Buying in the larger M&S stores is like entering a jungle (M&S to close 30 stores, 9 November). It’s exhausting. You go in looking for a pair of trousers but these are in at least four or five areas, from Autograph to Per Una and the Classic section. You don’t know if you have seen everything. The answer is to redesign the layout of the whole stock. Return to having areas that deal with one item only – for example, a coat section, a trouser section etc. Within each there could be diverse styles and clearcolour-coding of sizes. Then we could make a beeline for what we wanted. People haven’t the time or energy to search and search. Quality of materials has been sacrificed in order to keep prices down, and some styles are a bit uninspiring. More checkouts too, though the staff there are helpful and courteous. We do need M&S.
Christina Naylor
Languenan, France
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Householders are being warned to brace themselves for a rise in their electricity bills as a series of freak events conspires to send wholesale prices rocketing.
Safety concerns at France’s nuclear power plants operated by the energy company EDF have led to many reactors being temporarily shut down. There have been similar suspensions in Belgium. In addition, a lack of rain in Norway and Sweden – whose hydro plants generate large amounts of electricity for their European neighbours – has limited both countries’ energy production.
The combined effect has been to send the price at which energy companies buy their power through the roof.
Last Monday, a UK energy company buying power on a next-day contract would have paid about £150 a megawatt hour. The average price a year ago was £38.10. For companies that had not agreed forward contracts, the cost has soared to more than £1,000.
Several smaller electricity suppliers have already raised prices or withdrawn competitive tariffs. Energy analysts say it will not be long before the big operators follow if, as looks possible, this winter starts with a protracted cold snap.
An index tracking the price power companies pay for electricity, produced by the consultancy Cornwall Energy, is at its highest since it started in 2012. “It is unusual for there to be significant volumes of outages in the French nuclear fleet, however this is also one of our tightest winters in recent times in terms of extra capacity, which has also influenced how high prices rise,” said Cornwall analyst Tom Edwards.
Twenty of EDF’s nuclear reactors have been stopped for checks on their steam generators, five more than would normally be shut down for maintenance at any one time. In July, EDF was forced to lower its 2016 nuclear output target to 395-400 TWh (terrawatt hours) from 408-416 TWh because of the need for “additional controls during the second half of the year” to show its reactors can operate safely. Last month, the group revised its nuclear output target again, from 380-390 TWh to 378-385 TWh.
A spokeswoman said it was looking at ways to ensure it could maintain electricity generation by using its thermal and hydraulic plants. She said EDF would buy more electricity on the European wholesale markets if necessary and use “contractual flexibilities with some industrial customers and individuals to limit their electricity consumption”.
Edwards said supply issues were currently to blame for price rises, but extra demand could soon be a factor. “The increase was primarily driven by rising wholesale prices, so the effect will be driven by supply and demand issues,” he said. “If it’s a cold winter and supply issues remain, then this should persist for the next three to four months. There has been some concern raised about how suppliers will cope over the winter if they aren’t able to hedge against these short-term price rises.”
Earlier this month, the Met Office predicted that the chance of the UK experiencing temperatures in the “cold” category was 30% – 1.5 times the usual risk – and warned that “contingency planners and others with sensitivity to cold weather might need to consider this elevated level of risk”.
Larger operators that generate their own electricity can protect themselves against rising wholesale costs. But this is not so for smaller operators. Earlier this month, Southend Energy, one of the larger independent operators, announced rises of 9% and 8.4% respectively on its fixed and greener tariffs.
“Some suppliers have increased the price of their fixed tariffs following the recent rise in wholesale energy prices, which is putting pressure on all suppliers’ costs,” said a spokesman for the energy markets regulator, Ofgem, which suggested many consumers could save about £300 a year by switching.
Edwards said the current uncertainty would be felt by consumers in the longer term. “Suppliers will increase their standard variable tariffs if costs do rise substantially, but this will be affected by their hedging ahead of this winter. We would expect fixed tariffs in the future to be higher to take into account expected risk of short-term price volatility.”
Banks and building societies seem more interested in escaping, rather than entering, the best-buy tables
If you thought things couldn’t get any worse for savers, think again. During October there were 240 rate cuts as banks and building societies withdrew many top-paying accounts.
Financial data firm Moneyfacts says 23 best-buy savings deals were withdrawn during the month, and some of the best new deals on the market were only available for a few days.
Savers’ options were slim even before the Bank of England cut its base rate to 0.25% in August, but they’ve since taken a further hit. Among the top deals to go were the five-year fixed-rate bond from Yorkshire bank which was paying 2.08%, and the 1.5% 12-month-notice account from Raphaels bank. Hodge bank’s popular 90-day notice account, which paid 1.3% for deposits of £10,000 plus, is another no longer accepting applications.
Rachel Springall from Moneyfacts says there’s no end in sight for the cycle of cuts and withdrawals. “Cuts have clearly engulfed the market, but what’s worse is the fact that some of the best deals are being withdrawn at an alarming rate,” she says. “Making countless cuts to a savings range is just not practical, which is why providers are resorting to closing some of their most attractive deals to cope with demand. With deals disappearing so rapidly, it’s more important than ever for savers to look at the best-buys and act fast in opening a new account if they want a top rate.”
The SavingsChampion website, which also monitors rates, says most banks and building societies seem to be “trying to escape from the best-buy tables rather than enter them”. It is pointing savers towards Secure Trust Bank, which has launched a five-year fixed-rate bond paying 2.01% on balances of more than £1,000.
Charter bank, meanwhile, has launched a two-year fixed-rate bond paying 1.51%, also with a £1,000 minimum and the option for monthly interest. The best instant access online rate is a paltry 1%, available from National Counties building society, RCI bank and NS&I.
These rates are all better than those on offer to some savers. Data from the Bank of England shows the average interest rate on instant access accounts dropped from 0.3% at the end of July to just 0.22% by the end of October, with more cuts to existing accounts still filtering through.
We travelled off peak from Manchester Piccadilly to London Euston in September, using two advance first-class tickets which cost £35.65 each with my disabled person’s railcard. But when the ticket inspector checked, I couldn’t find my railcard, though I had a photo of it on my mobile. She told me this wasn’t acceptable and I’d have to buy new tickets – for an extra £201.85 each.
I asked, instead, to get off the train, but was told this wasn’t possible and that I had to buy the new tickets. The inspector did mention that Virgin will sometimes reimburse the cost in such circumstances. On this basis I agreed to pay the additional fare.
I immediately went on the Virgin website to submit the claim, even asking the inspector to show me how to correctly fill in the complaint. As the train pulled into Euston I found my railcard in my bag – it must have been trapped in the lining. I tried to find the inspector, but couldn’t.
Since then I have been told by Virgin that my claim has been refused on the basis that, when asked, I didn’t show my railcard. I escalated my complaint to management, which merely confirmed the rejection.
I accept that rail firms have to make sure people don’t fraudulently travel on cheaper fares, but in this case I had a card that I could have shown at the journey’s end.
The price of the new ticket is totally disproportionate to the original cost. I have spent about £5,000 a year for the past five years travelling between London and Manchester and find the company’s response astounding. GC, London
From a train operator’s – if not from the customer’s – point of view, the rules are crystal clear and are the same across the entire rail network. Under the terms and conditions of the railcard and National Rail “conditions of carriage”, a ticket must be accompanied by a valid railcard if the card was used to obtain a discount – which, in your case, it was. Until you have a valid replacement railcard, you have to pay the full fare, which is not refundable.
The difference between the ticket prices was, admittedly, massive, but the train manager charged you for an “anytime” first-class ticket, which is one of the most expensive, compared with your advance single tickets. In practice, ticket inspectors do have some discretion for leniency, but clearly this was not extended to you on this occasion.
Virgin agreed to look into this case but did not change its tune: “It is a rail industry standard that the customer is responsible for having their railcard with them … as this customer was found to be travelling without their railcard they were charged the full amount of a new ticket. This is something highlighted to customers when purchasing their ticket.”
This is a handy opportunity to remind railcard holders to always keep them in a safe place when travelling and not to rely on photographic evidence.
We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
The failure of employers in elite professions such as law and the media to stop using unpaid interns in the face of warnings must be met with a ban on the “unfair” practice, the government’s social mobility commission will recommend this week.
The most sought-after professions have become even less representative than the most selective universities, with jobs in effect closed off to those without a network of contacts and significant financial support. Only 4% of doctors, 6% of barristers, 11% of journalists and 12% of solicitors have working-class origins, according to recent research by the London School of Economics using Labour Force Survey data. In its end-of-year report to parliament, the commission warns that Britain remains “a deeply elitist nation where the chance of getting a well-paid job in a top profession is still strongly correlated with social background”.
It adds: “It is time to treat internships as part of the formal, not informal, labour market. In our 2014 state of the nation report we said that unless we found evidence that the employers were taking action to end the unfair activity of unpaid internships, the government should bring forward legislation to ban them.
“Unfortunately, we have been able to find little such evidence. As a result, the commission believes it is high time that internships are defined in law and unpaid internships banned.
“Any work placements that last more than four weeks should be classified as internships and those doing them should receive at least the minimum wage.”
Internships ranging from a few weeks to a year or more have become a prerequisite for access to the professions, the commission will claim.
The vast majority of internships are said to be in London, where the cost of living is highest. With the average cost of renting a room in London £743 a month and a monthly travel card more than £100, an internship can cost more than £1,000 a month to fund.
“The damaging impact of unpaid internships on social mobility cannot be overstated,” the commission’s report will say. “Young people without financial support from their parents are effectively excluded due to means not merit and potentially locked out from sought-after careers entirely.”
The commission, chaired by the former Labour cabinet minister Alan Milburn, finds that people from working-class backgrounds – even high attainers – are less likely to secure such jobs because they have “less access to networks and knowledge to navigate the system than their more affluent peers”.
The proportion of those in elite occupations coming from non-professional or managerial backgrounds was only four percentage points greater (50%) in 2014 than it was in 2005.
Just over three years after graduating in 2010-11, those from the most disadvantaged backgrounds were 11% less likely to be in professional employment than those from the most advantaged.
People whose parents worked in higher managerial and professional occupations make up only 14.7% of the population, but 27.2% of them end up in those occupations. Conversely, those with parents who worked in routine or semi-routine employment form 31.7% of the population, but only 17% of those who end up in top jobs.
The commission, whose deputy chair is former Tory cabinet minister Baroness (Gillian) Shephard, welcomes new recruitment processes brought in by some employers, such as looking beyond high academic results, lowering or removing Ucas points for graduate entry and introducing “CV blind” interviews.
But it finds that the medical profession has “found it much harder to open up … to those from disadvantaged backgrounds. Others, like the Bar, risk becoming even more socially exclusive”. The report adds: “In the arts and media, the dramatic rise in unpaid internships and practice of securing work experience through contacts is closing off these careers to all but those from privileged backgrounds.”
Nearly half of the recruiters who took part in the High Fliers 2016 graduate labour market survey stated that graduates with no previous work experience would have little or no chance of receiving a job offer from their organisation.
According to the same research, 32% of new entrants are recruited by top graduate recruiters from internship programmes; in banking, it is as high as nearly 80% of the graduate intake.
Theresa May has claimed that tackling social inequalities is a priority and has criticised the current situation where: “If you’re at a state school, you’re less likely to reach the top professions than if you are educated privately.”
The new prime minister’s cabinet has the lowest proportion of ministers who went to private school in more than 70 years, with 70% state-educated.
However, the report says that evidence from some firms lays bare that real progress will only be made if leading employers radically reform recruitment practices.
The commission in partnership with the Social Mobility Foundation has launched a Social Mobility Employer Index which will benchmark firms’ efforts in areas such as recruitment, selection and progression.
The report says that the index will be run with the aim of “encouraging employers to compete to recruit, and to keep, the best and brightest candidates from lower socioeconomic backgrounds”, but denies that it is seeking to name and shame the worst performers. The final rankings will be announced in the spring.
The texts began arriving on customers’ phones over the weekend: Tesco Bank had spotted unusual activity on a significant number of current accounts, and was getting in touch with customers to alert them. But that wasn’t enough to prevent £2.5m being siphoned out of about 9,000 accounts, and transferred to criminals whose identities and locations remain a mystery.
The damage to the bank’s reputation may be significant – but more significant still is that the attack is only the latest, and presently most visible, example of a rising tide of onslaughts against online banking, which seek to exploit any weak spot in web-facing computer systems and their users.
The hackers’ motives are straightforward. As the wild west bank robber Willie Sutton explained when asked to explain his motivation: “That’s where the money is.”
And experts warn that 2016, which has already seen an audacious attempt to steal £763m ($951m) electronically from Bangladesh’s central bank in the spring, is the precursor for much worse to come.
“Because a lot of economies aren’t in good shape, you’ll see more and more skilled computing people being out of work, and turning to the dark side where they work for criminals,” says Ilia Kolochenko, chief executive of High-Tech Bridge, a web security company. “And at the same time you’ve got a lot of companies trying to optimise their costs, and preferring to save money on the cyber side. It’s hard to predict how successful and how large the scale will be, but I’m pretty sure it will get worse.”
The Bangladesh attack occurred in February, when hackers broke into the Swift network, the international financial transfer information system, and told the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to make 32 transactions totalling $951m to accounts around the world. Although only $101m, in two transactions, was paid out, a total of $63m has not been recovered. Swift has since warned banks to update their software.
It is highly unlikely that the same group was behind the Tesco Bank attack; the amounts involved – and number of accounts – are so different as to imply separate operations. However, this suggests that various gangs are trying to break into banks and accounts online. There have certainly been a number of online raids – some involving big money. In 2013, online security company Kaspersky said that as much as $900m had been stolen from 100 banks after their internal systems were infected with malware.
And in late 2015, the UK’s National Crime Agency investigated the theft of £20m from several accounts, enabled by malware which had infiltrated customers’ PCs.
There are suspicions that Tesco Bank’s security model was more vulnerable to compromise than it should have been: once logged in to a current account, a user could set up a transfer to a current account in another bank without having to get an SMS confirmation. The question, still unanswered, is how the accounts were targeted.
It is possible that the hackers found a weakness in the back-office systems – possibly from a current or former employee, suggests Kolochenko.
Tesco Bank declined to discuss whether there are any patterns in the accounts that were targeted: “This is a criminal matter, and so we are constrained in what we can say,” a spokesman said. He declined to say whether any criminals had been identified or what lines of investigation were being pursued.
Andrew Bailey, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), told MPs last week that “there are elements of this [attack] that look unprecedented”, but did not elucidate.
What parts are unprecedented? The fraud was far from the largest conducted on a UK bank; in September, the23-year-old head of a fraud ring, Feezan Hameed, was jailed for 11 years, after his gang stole £113m from British banks. They fooled people into thinking they were talking to their bank, and got them to hand over their internet details – which he would then use to get access to their accounts. Only £47m has been recovered.
So if the FCA’s Bailey is worried, it must be about the online nature and the scale of the attack – not its value. And this is the concern: if criminals can compromise 9,000 accounts in a matter of hours during a weekend and siphon off an average of £280 from each one before being spotted, what’s to prevent it being done to an even greater number of accounts for greater amounts of money, and leaving banks to pick up the pieces? What’s to stop it being done to any bank every night?
The idea of banks building up a false sense of security before a disaster might sound familiar. Simon Moores, an independent consultant on security, likens the situation now to the US financial market in 2006/7, when complacency over the inherent risks of mortgage-based products was compounded by ratings agencies which had an interest in certifying sketchy financial instruments as safe. “It’s just like The Big Short,” Moores says, referring to the film and book about the lead-up to the financial collapse, which was forecast by only a few. “The computer security industry is worth £30bn, but it doesn’t work any more. Having a box to protect your bank website or business doesn’t work. But nobody is prepared to accept the fact.”
Banks don’t like discussing hacks; more than 100 banks are reckoned to have had up to $900m stolen in late 2013, according to security company Kaspersky. The hackers compromised internal computers and used video feeds for months to learn daily routines.
Moores points out that 2015 was a record year for cyber-attacks globally – but that’s only because 2016 hasn’t finished yet. Malware – which tries to attack PCs or corporate systems – is on the rise: “There are now thought to be more than 500 million worms, Trojans and other viruses in circulation, and reportedly every day there’s another 1.25 million ‘polymorphic’ threats [which change as they are copied between machines, making identification harder].”
For banks, the attraction of online banking is clear: it doesn’t require expensive offices in high streets, or the employment of thousands of tellers who might be vulnerable to criminals through blackmail or greed. Instead, it relies on computers, and a relatively small and highly trained (and well-paid) staff, while the customer-support function normally done by tellers can be outsourced to call centres that have little more access than ordinary customers to the banks’ databases.
For the customer, online banking should mean greater convenience – it can be done anywhere and any time you can get an internet connection – and reliability, since the challenges (such as passwords and memorable words or phrases) you face to log on successfully are more complex than a simple four-digit number at a cash machine.
But for both, inserting a computer between the customer and the bank has opened up new risks from malware targeting web browsers, computers and mobile phones. Browsers, software and computers – both the customers’ and the banks’ – can have mysterious bugs which allow access to hackers and leave almost no trace; there is a constant need for bug-finding and updates to defeat them.
Even while banks strengthen their software, though, the weak link can lie outside. One of the biggest problems for online banking was the malware Zeus, which defeated many antivirus packages. First seen in 2007, it lurked in the background of Windows computers infected via email attachments or web pages and captured logon passwords and account numbers. By 2010, it had infected nearly 4m PCs.
In April two men – a 27-year-old Russian called Aleksandr Andreevich Panin and an Algerian accomplice, Hamza Bendelladj, were given prison sentences totalling more than 24 years for their role in creating and running a “botnet” of infected computers called SpyEye, which relied on Zeus and had stolen more than $100m from US banks and, by extension, their customers. By 2011, there were versions of Zeus that infected smartphones running on Google’s Android, putting banking apps at risk.
So far though, banks appear to have managed to stay ahead in the arms race; the growth in the use of smartphones may actually have helped, because their security model is generally better than PCs, holding apps in deeper “silos”.
Customers have often borne the cost of the skirmishes, though. Ross Anderson, professor of security engineering at Cambridge University’s computer security group, has clashed with the UK’s financial instutions for more than a decade, first over weaknesses in cash-machine security and more recently over banks’ reluctance to accept the cost of online fraud, while they reap the profits of lower online overheads.
Customers who have been defrauded often have to fight for their refunds, Anderson says. Many of those whose money was stolen by Hameed are still trying to get their money back, he points out.
“As long as UK banks don’t have to bear the cost of fraud, they won’t have an incentive to improve their security,” he says.
He notes that the Tesco case – in which refunds were immediate – was a rare and welcome exception. He notes too, that being able to transfer money more quickly has brought significant problems.
“In the old days, if you wanted to send £1,000 to your aunt in Australia, it would cost you £30 and take four days and you might have to visit the branch. Now it can be set up and sent in seconds. If you’re a fraud victim, you can’t stop it.”
It might sound strange for a computer security expert to bemoan faster payments. But the problem is more one of imperfect authentication: clearly, something failed at Tesco. Because thousands of customers were affected by the attack, Tesco paid up; but when a single person or business is hit by Zeus or another variant, banks often dispute it.
Anderson says: “They shouldn’t design systems for perfect humans who can recall dozens of passwords. They should design for people as they are, faults and all.”
Moores says the threat to the users, and the banks, will only increase. “The attacks are going to get automated, and they’re going to recruit machine learning – that stuff’s not just for Google.”
Banks don’t like to talk about online hacking, especially when it involves customer accounts. But here are some that we know of.
2013 As many as 100 banks worldwide are discovered to have been infiltrated by malware – sent as email attachments to bank employees – which sent back video and other data from internal networks. That helped hackers to steal a total of $900m, according to the Kaspersky Lab, which claims it had gone on for almost two years. Neither the amounts stolen nor the details have been confirmed.
December 2014 About 730,000 login details for wealthy clients of Morgan Stanley are offered for sale online, after being stolen by an employee, 30-year-old Galen Marsh, between 2011 and 2014. Morgan Stanley says it found no evidence that customers lost any money. Marsh pleaded guilty in September 2015, receiving 36 months’ probation. Morgan Stanley was fined $1m.
Meanwhile, hackers in Russia and Ukraine break into the internal networks at financial institutions in their countries and infect ATMs with malware that would give them 50 times the amount they seemed to be taking out. The group is reckoned to have gained access by buying access to PCs already infected by opportunistic hackers using weaknesses in Microsoft Office and Windows.
January 2015 Hackers acquire codes from Swift, the international financial network which enables transfers between banks, to get access to a bank in Ecuador, Banco del Austro, and transfer $12m out of it via Wells Fargo to banks in Hong Kong, Los Angeles and Dubai. The bank sues Wells Fargo but does not tell Swift, which only learns of the incident via a lawsuit in May 2016.
April 2015 Ryanair confirms that £3.3m has been stolen from it by a fraudulent transfer via a Chinese bank. Neither the bank nor Ryanair offers any information about how the fraud happened.
Late 2015 The UK’s National Crime Agency investigates a series of bank frauds enabled by malware called Dridex, which infects PCs and harvests online banking details from users. British accounts are reckoned to have had £20m taken from them and paid to accounts in eastern Europe.
February 2016 $81m is stolen from Bangladesh’s central bank; investigators link the malware used to break into the systems to that used to penetrate Sony Pictures in 2014 by a hacking group called Lazarus. The hackers had sought to transfer $1bn, but a fault in their code halted the transaction early.
May 2016 Swift says a Vietnamese bank has been hacked, but doesn’t disclose whether any money was lost, or which bank is involved. It urges its members, numbering more than 9,000, to keep their software up to date.
June 2016 $10m is stolen from a bank in Ukraine after the Swift system is exploited using a method similar to that used against the Bangladesh central bank in February.
November 2016 Tesco Bank says £2.5m has been stolen over the weekend of 5-6 November from the accounts of about 9,000 customers, out of a total of 136,000. All have been refunded; questions remain about how the transfers were made. Tesco could face a substantial fine from regulators.
Alex Jones* has to switch his phone off at work so the constant text messages do not distract him. He gets around 20-25 a day from payday lenders and brokers offering high-cost loans of up to £1,000 a time.
“Need cash? We have reviewed your application …” a typical text reads. “A loan of up to £900 is ready to complete,” says another. “We’ve received your loan inquiry. Are you able to take our call? Reply YES …”.
His email inbox is just as full, with spam messages from brokers and lenders arriving as often as every five minutes at some points during the day. The same lender might send messages at 10.59am and 12.39pm, while two for the same broker arrive one after another. Taking up any of these offers of credit would not be cheap – all the firms offer short-term high-cost borrowing, often at annual rates of more than 1,000%.
Jones, who is in his early 40s and has a wife and young son, is upfront about the fact he opened the door to these lenders. A gambling addict, he took out short-term loans over a few years, his debts mounting up until he became insolvent in late 2014. Recent money worries saw him searching for loans this summer, and the floodgates opened.
“Once you put the feelers out, as lots of people do, they start to show their true colours,” he says. “There are firms out there who have taken a lot of flak, but even with that negative press and extra regulation they are still happy to bombard and harass and even lend to someone who has a history of not being able to pay it back and is in insolvency.”
He says he feels like a drug addict being constantly offered temptation. “Addiction is a very complex and difficult thing,” he says. “You have bumps in the road, and when you have those bumps the very last thing you need is temptation. My life would be immeasurably easier if my drug of choice wasn’t as readily available. If it wasn’t so in my face it would be less of a problem.”
Jones may have fallen victim to what is known as a “ping tree”, whereby an application is made through a particular type of site that is itself not a lender but a “lead generator”. It passes (or “pings”) your request on to many other firms. Although the rules around payday loans have been tightened, it seems some lenders and brokers are still playing fast and loose with people’s contact details.
It is not the first time Jones has fallen into this trap. Several years ago he was being similarly inundated with messages from lenders and brokers, but since then the industry has come under the stewardship of a new regulator, and Jones thought things had changed. Also, his credit record is worse. In late 2014 he and his partner entered into an IVA, an insolvency arrangement that allows borrowers to negotiate part-repayment of their debts over a set period of time. At the time the couple could manage to pay £380 a month into the IVA after bills and the cost of travelling to work, but this summer the rented home they had lived in for eight years was put on the market and they found that their monthly costs had fallen behind the market rate. Their new home, in a less nice part of town, costs them £1,200 a month, compared with the £800 they were paying, and as a result they are behind on the IVA.
Despite the IVA Jones found he was able to take out new loans from two lenders, neither of whom asked him to disclose previous money problems. His terrible credit record proved no barrier.
In the summer Citizens Advice said some payday lenders were still flouting the FCA’s guidance on responsible lending, with around a quarter of borrowers saying they hadn’t been asked, or could not remember being asked, about their situation. It cited the example of a client who was granted a payday loan following checks despite suffering from depression and alcoholism, having no permanent address, being previously declared bankrupt and having only benefit income.
For Jones the emails and texts flood in, even as the lenders he is now behind with get in touch to ask for payments; the IVA company is also chasing him. He has considered changing his phone number, but at the moment just turns it off. He says he doesn’t think unsubscribing will make a difference.
Meanwhile, the FCA reaffirms that under existing rules lenders are not allowed to send emails telling people that they have been approved for a loan. “Our rules require that firms do not state or imply to customers that credit is available regardless of the customer’s financial circumstances or status. We also require that all communications are clear, fair and not misleading. If a financial promotion is misleading it is likely to contravene our rules.”
Jones says he wants people to know that lenders and brokers are still aggressively targeting borrowers, despite the new rules. “If you fill in your details, it doesn’t just go to the one company – it gets fired out to all of the sharks in the pool.”
* Alex Jones is not his real name
The debt charity StepChange has called on the City watchdog to ban unsolicited calls for “high-risk financial products” such as payday loans.
“Firms are contacting people who are financially vulnerable with offers of loans that can cause serious financial harm,” says the charity’s head of policy Peter Tutton. “The problem for many people is they have lost control of their personal data and do not know which organisations have or will use their information – and sometimes this can result in being bombarded.”
In a report published on Wednesday the charity said that nearly two years on from the introduction of tough regulations, the payday loans market “continues to show signs of irresponsible lending and poor treatment of people in financial difficulty”. It said inappropriate lending was still occurring, people were still building up multiple loans, and affordability checks carried out by lenders were still not always effective.
In the first six months of the year, StepChange helped 28,000 people with payday loan debts, with more than a third (37%) having three or more such debts. The average amount owed was £1,380 – just £17 lower than in 2014 before the regulations came into force. However, the proportion of people coming to the charity with payday loan debts has fallen from its peak of 23% prior to the regulations to 16% this year.
A number of additional rules came into force in January 2015, including a requirement that interest and fees on all high-cost short-term credit loans are capped at 0.8% per day of the amount borrowed. If borrowers do not repay their loans on time, default charges must not exceed £15. In addition, the total cost (fees, interest etc) is capped at 100% of the original sum, which means no borrower will ever pay back more than twice what they borrowed.
Tutton added that the government’s digital economy bill, currently going through parliament, was an opportunity to tighten the rules around firms selling and sharing personal data.
If you are struggling with debts, there are many places you can turn to for free advice. They include:
• PayPlan A service financed by the credit industry at Payplan.com or call 0800 280 2816
It’s virtually a year to the day since David Cameron declared that “access to the internet shouldn’t be a luxury – it should be a right... we’re going to bring fast broadband to every home and business that wants it”.
But for many trying to work in broadband “not-spots,” such pledges are increasingly hollow. Now, many communities are taking matters into their own hands, and some are hopeful they might be able to secure a solution that would mean they are no longer stuck in the digital dark ages.
The government has previously claimed that 95% of the country should have access to “superfast” broadband by the end of 2017, but last month Cameron’s successor Theresa May highlighted the scale of the challenge when she complained that “half of people living in rural areas, and so many small businesses, can’t get a decent connection”.
However, it’s not just in remote locations. Take Damian Belson, for example. He is a web developer who is forced to go to cafes and the library to upload his work because his broadband speed is so snail-like.
He lives in Rotherhithe in south-east London, just a few hundred metres from the towers of Canary Wharf. As he says, it’s “almost central London,” yet thousands of Rotherhithe residents are only getting around two megabits per second. The average UK broadband speed, according to Ofcom, is 28.9Mbps (this is due to be updated in the coming weeks), and “superfast” broadband is defined as 24Mbps or more.
There are many other digital black holes around the country: earlier this year website Cable.co.uk named the places with the slowest average speeds, with the list topped by the Gloucestershire village of Miserden, where the typical figure was just 1.3Mbps, and the lowest speed measured was just 0.12Mbps.
I live in Ceredigion in West Wales, which, according to the news and information site Thinkbroadband, lies seventh from the bottom out of 650 UK constituencies for connectivity.
As is the case with many places dealing with the everyday challenges of trying to work within an area with internet speeds supposedly often lower than those at Mount Everest base camp, frustrations run deep.
In urban areas, it is often blocks of flats that are particularly afflicted because many of these buildings have a dedicated line from the ground floor to the nearest telephone exchange. They are made of copper, and can run long distances, slowing the speed at which information travels. In some cases, communities fed up with waiting for BT to get to them are turning to the growing numbers of smaller companies and local ventures that offer potential solutions for those in supposedly hard-to-reach areas.
These include WiSpire, a local service provider based in Norfolk that is owned by the Diocese of Norwich and publishing company Archant, and uses parish church spires to deliver broadband to remote areas.
Steve Maine, who was its chief executive until the beginning of this month, says: “In reality, fibre cable is a good technology for high transition speeds in urban areas, but much more expensive per person in less populated regions. You need to use other solutions.” He adds: “Good, reliable broadband is more important than ‘superfast’ for the majority of people. For those getting by on under 2Mbps, 10Mbps would be nirvana.”
So how are some of these people faring?
“We live opposite Canary Wharf, which is almost central London, yet the area has one of the largest number of exchange-only lines. This means there are very few cabinets and so it’s more expensive for BT to upgrade. If you’re lucky enough to live near the exchange you can get 8Mbps or 9Mbps, but for thousands of us it’s nearer 2Mbps.
“When I became self-employed about five years ago I knew it would be an issue, but I didn’t realise how much. I can work from home when I’m emailing or coding offline, but I can’t upload anything. Luckily, there are some nice cafes and a good library in the area. It doesn’t feel like an inconvenience so much until you realise how much time you’re wasting. It doesn’t affect the quality of my work, but I definitely have to put in longer hours to make up the time.
“We’ve got a pressure group, BroadbandSE16, and we’ve been fighting for a better internet connection for four or five years and tried everything.
“Based on Thinkbroadband estimates, around 7,400 homes in the area can’t get broadband faster than 10Mbps, and 4,000 hover around 2Mbps. The local council made an election promise a few years ago to solve the problems, and last summer the managing director of BT London outlined what he was going to do to improve it in Rotherhithe by March 2017. I’m afraid I just don’t believe what they’re saying. Anyway, none of BT’s published plans addresses the issues of those most affected, so the 4,000 figure won’t change much in the foreseeable future.”
Belson, 47, says a company called Hyperoptic – which specialises in bringing full-fibre optic broadband direct to “multi-dwelling” buildings – is being very proactive, “but currently doesn’t have plans to connect single houses, which Rotherhithe has a lot of, so this will only be part of the solution”.
He adds that Relish, a fast unlimited 4G data-only supplier covering central London, tried to extend its service to his area a year ago, but its planning application for a new mast was rejected by Southwark council.
“We now feel at an utter loss. We would love the council to work with, and encourage, Relish to reapply but to date they have not responded to our questions about them.”
Belson says that they don’t need the world’s fastest broadband – “we’d be happy with 20-30Mbps”.
“I live in the village of Poole, two miles outside the busy market town of Nantwich, Cheshire. It’s rural but not remote, with several schools, industrial estates and local small businesses. We only recently moved here and, before buying, we used the Openreach website postcode check on the property. In October 2015 it indicated that broadband was in place and ‘superfast upgrade available’, while the Connecting Cheshire website said it was ‘coming very soon’. That, and the fact that when we viewed the house the vendor gave us a postcard BT had delivered saying ‘Superfast broadband now in your street’, gave us enough reassurance and we bought the house.
“Yet nothing has happened. The speed in the village is still poor.
“I run a consulting business from home, and uploading and downloading artwork is impossible, and simple email torturous. If I log on to online banking to transfer funds it may take three or four attempts. Watching HD television or catch-up services is almost impossible – if we want to watch a Sky movie we have to give the TV 24 hours’ notice so it can download overnight.
“Initially, I spoke to Openreach to get a quote for a community-paid connection. The process almost drove me to tears – it took me five months and a personal visit to the head office in London to finally get contact with a community fibre officer who could look into this for us. Yet, after further delays, we were told that to proceed we’d have to pay between £15,000 to £50,000 for the village and, after receipt of this amount, it would take up to a year to get connected.
“I don’t think you have to be a rocket scientist to read between the lines with BT – they don’t want the business. Instead, we found a private company based in Chester: ITS Technology Group, is offering a simple, effective, cheap solution in a matter of a few months. Thirty meg up and down speeds, unlimited monthly data, no connection fee... they’ve been incredible. It’s like finding the Holy Grail for many of us. The only issue is we need 60 households to sign up to make it work commercially for them, and that’s 90% of the village, so it’s taking a while to convince everyone. If it does happen, it will make a real difference to a lot of families and businesses.”
“We run a flower farm in Foulden in the Scottish Borders. When the broadband is poor it’s really poor – our connection is 0.2Mbps. On top of this, there’s no consistency – you think something is loading and it’s gone again.
“Every Monday I put out an email to florists in Edinburgh saying what flowers we have in stock – sometimes it takes until Tuesday for the mailing list to upload. I manage but it takes 10 times as long. I work most evenings until late to catch up.
“Tax returns, Microsoft office updates ... everything is online. If you don’t do things electronically, people think you’re a real luddite. But I’m not. I just want to be able to do things that ordinary people can do. We thought we’d be getting an upgrade last year but no. I’m very annoyed about this – it got our hopes up. Apparently we’re too far from the exchange for BT to upgrade us.
“There are six houses in our hamlet and it’s the same for all of us. Our hope is a small local company called Briskona, which utilises ‘line of sight’ technology that is used widely in rural Spain and Ireland. The way it works is that if you can see the mast, you should get a signal.
“They’ve been great – there’s a mast on a hill a few miles away, and they’re moving it higher up the hill to see if it can work for us. They haven’t made us any promises but they are going to try to connect us.
“I know they have been working on it, as one of our neighbours has been watching them with binoculars. If it does happen, it’ll cost £165 to register and then prices start from £17 a month for 5Mbps. We’re quietly hopeful.”
Broadband remains the only essential utility we buy without knowing exactly what we are paying for, writes Rupert Jones.
So says Dan Howdle, a telecoms expert at advice website Cable.co.uk, adding: “No one pays a flat tariff for a mystery quantity of gas, or an unknown number of kilowatt hours, and yet this is exactly the situation with broadband. Advertised ‘up to’ speeds are simply fiction for many.”
Howdle says Ofcom and the Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) are to announce possible changes to the way speeds are advertised later this year.
In the meantime, new rules took effect on 31 October. Broadband adverts, which include pricing, should:
• Show all upfront and monthly costs, forcing companies to include line rental in the headline price.
• Give greater prominence to the length of the contract and any post-discount pricing.
Earlier this year the ASA and Ofcom said customers “found it difficult to calculate the true cost of a contract when presented with ads where broadband, introductory offer, line rental, contract length and one-off costs were presented separately, and some elements given greater prominence.”
They found that a hefty 81% of those asked were unable to correctly work out the total cost of a broadband deal.
Howdle adds: “This change to more honest pricing is a good start, but we have a long way to go yet.”
• This article was amended on 29 November 2016 to make clear that Steve Maine is no longer chief executive of WiSpire.
Every week a Guardian Money reader submits a question, and it’s up to you to help him or her out – a selection of the best answers will appear in next Saturday’s paper.
We often go on holiday with another family – we have two children while they have three. We’ve always halved the costs, but now the kids are older is it reasonable to divide the expenditure differently, given there are five of them and four of us?
Do you have a problem readers could solve? Email your suggestions to money@theguardian.com or write to us at Money, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU.
I became disabled nearly five years ago, losing the use of my hands gradually over 12 months, with my general mobility becoming more impaired. I’m now transitioning into a wheelchair. Prior to this I’d been employed for seven years in middle management with the same employer, and was generally doing well in my career of 15 years. I had never had any issues or performance concerns and was considered a high achiever.
I was made redundant 14 months after becoming disabled, but with a good package I accepted this and moved on. I interview well and had a good CV. I was offered a new job quite quickly, but when I declared my disability the role disappeared. I decided after that to not declare my disabilities until I had my foot in the door, so to speak. I did just that, declaring my disability on day one of a new job and was made “redundant” 11 months later.
Evidence of discrimination was gathered and I was offered a payout. Cue the next job: same thing, same outcome. Now I’m 13 months into job four and in the same position. I know the signs and am manoeuvring before what I believe to be the inevitable happens.
I know that the law is on my side regarding discrimination, but taking a legal/official complaint route is distressing and unpleasant, and I’d hate to go through it again. I don’t want to be in a position where I have to keep on fighting.
How can I get off this merry-go-round? Now that I am a wheelchair user at least I don’t have the dilemma of whether or not to declare my disability. I don’t think my support needs are great: lightweight equipment (laptop, phone, etc), dictation software (£80), and wheelchair-accessible premises. Above everything, I need a manager who will support me, but how can I assess that in the job interview process?
What do I need to do differently to not just get a job but keep it? I don’t know how to get my career back on track.
I’m very glad you no longer have to make that difficult decision as to whether or not to declare your disability on first contact. I’m pretty sure that, in most cases, it’s preferable for it to be known from the beginning, but now at least that decision is made for you.
I am slightly surprised you don’t mention any organisations that exist specifically to support people in your situation. I’ve identified several that would seem promising. You may, of course, have approached them but found they led nowhere – but if you haven’t, I strongly recommend that you conduct an online search and follow up on those sites that seem to suit you best.
Some organisations specialise in matchmaking would-be employees with employers who are actively seeking to take on disabled people. What this means, of course, is that you’re not in unspoken competition with non-disabled people, so there’s no question of discrimination coming into play, however unconscious. As I have no direct knowledge of any of these organisations, I’m afraid I can’t advise you or make specific recommendations, but do please look into them thoroughly.
Reading your letter again, I’m struck by how little you have to say about your own particular strengths and experience. I suspect that you may, entirely understandably, have become so preoccupied with what you need that you’ve neglected to make the case for what you can offer. In your 20 years’ work you must have acquired knowledge and specific skills that would be of particular value to potential employers. These can prove more attractive to recruiters – even if only a minority – than more general “transferable skills”.
• Apply for a role at a disability charity or a disabled person’s organisation. They are used to making adjustments and you’d not be judged. But I’d understand if you’d feel a little “ghetto-ised”. As a disabled person, it took me a long time to find an organisation and a role where I felt comfortable and supported, but they’re out there. bristolianlondoner
• Ask lots of questions at interview about the provisions they’d make. The attitude they take should give you a good idea as to what they’d be like as an employer. HorseshoeMan
• Apply for civil service jobs. All government departments have a robust anti-discrimination policy that starts at the application stage, with the guaranteed interview principle for candidates who pass the agreed competency standard. KateJRR
I am blessed in that I have landed my dream job. After costly and exhausting retraining, hundreds of hours of voluntary work, dozens of applications and interviews, and a lot of determination and sacrifice, I have a satisfying and challenging job in the charity sector that pays well and in which I feel valued.
The problem is the commute. On good days the drive is 1 hour 20 minutes each way, on bad days more than two hours – and it is becoming exhausting. Public transport isn’t really an option due to remote locations.
I find that my evenings are lost in a haze of tiredness, and I fear – know – I am becoming unpleasant to be around. I used to have hobbies (cooking, socialising, creative clubs, etc) but these are no longer viable. Weekends are invaluable but I am tired a lot of the time.
Is there anything I can do to alleviate this, or do I suck it up? I don’t want to appear ungrateful. Working from home isn’t really an option as I manage volunteers and need to have an office presence. I have considered staying in an Airbnb during the week but I would be sad not to see my family every evening.
Driving yourself for four hours a day, and now much of it in the dark, is not only exhausting but also potentially dangerous. How about splitting your week? For example, spending Monday and Wednesday nights near your place of work and going home the other evenings. At the cost of two evenings away you would reduce your double commute from five days to just the one day, Friday – with the weekend to come.
I imagine your sympathetic employer would be anxious to help you, so if you could also negotiate the occasional Friday working from home, you’d eliminate the double commute and have an uninterrupted three days at home.
• I would find a cheapish B&B for two nights a week. Many smaller places would be glad of the regular business, and after a short time you tend to become a friend and be treated better than more casual customers. Alexandria
• Faced with a similar problem, I moved. I have walked or cycled to work for the past 35 years and been doing a job I enjoy and which wasn’t stressful. Work to live, don’t live to work. Derek23
• A motorbike cut my commuting time by well over 50% (legally too) and had the advantage of making me arrive in work with a smile on my face. DavGwyn
• Please don’t get a motorbike. I know how many motorcyclists have been killed on my local stretch of motorway during rush hour, which is slow-going but with sudden, lethal lane-changing. Airbnb a couple of nights. Sebnose
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
Tens of thousands of new mothers could each end up losing almost £5,000 of state pension when they are older due to an unintended quirk in the rules surrounding child benefit, according to a former government minister.
Steve Webb, ex-pensions minister, said the women, currently totalling around 50,000 but with the number rising every year, may have lost out on more than half a billion pounds in state pension rights over the past three years as a result of a wider clampdown on entitlement to child benefit. Webb makes the claim in a new report published by mutual insurer Royal London, which concludes that urgent action needs to be taken to deal with this problem “before a whole generation of women reach pension age with incomplete pension records”.
This is a sensitive area for the government because of an ongoing row about thousands of women born in the 1950s who say that controversial changes to the state pension age have left them facing financial hardship. The new claims relate to rules introduced in 2013 which mean that families where one parent earns more than £60,000 a year are hit with a tax charge which wipes out their entire child benefit payment. The rules, known as the high income child benefit charge, also affect people earning £50,000-plus, because once you hit this level of income child benefit is gradually clawed back until you receive nothing at £60,000.
Those in this position can choose to carry on receiving their child benefit, but if they do they have to pay extra tax, which will cancel out some or all of the money they get. Many people have opted to give up the benefit so they don’t have to pay the extra tax.
However, the problem highlighted by Royal London relates particularly to those higher-earning households who when starting a family decide not to bother claiming child benefit in the first place, because most or all of it will be clawed back via tax.
These people may not realise that under the current national insurance system, a parent – usually the mother – receiving child benefit for a youngster under the age of 12 gets a year of NI credits towards their state pension record. This means that even if they aren’t in work and don’t pay NI contributions, their state pension is protected. However, the failure to even make an initial claim for child benefit means that the year of NI credits is never triggered, and the parent will miss out.
Missing out on a year of NI contributions could prove very costly later on. “Being one year short at the end of your working life could cost nearly £5,000 in missing state pension rights through the course of a typical retirement,” the report says. The company adds: “Growing numbers of mothers are simply not claiming child benefit in the first place and thereby losing out on valuable credits towards their future state pension rights.”
The full state pension is currently £155.65 a week, based on 35 “qualifying years” of NI contributions and credits. Assuming a woman ends up with 34 thirty-fifths rather than 35 thirty-fifths, she will lose one thirty-fifth of that full rate of £155.65 a week, which is £231 per year, or more than £4,850 in total assuming a 21-year retirement.
The number of people potentially missing out stood at an estimated 37,500 in 2015-16, and is rising at roughly 20,000 a year, so will be more than 50,000 by the end of the current financial year, says Webb, who is director of policy at Royal London.
Consumers worried about falling victim to online banking fraud should consider banks that give customers card readers and avoid those which rely on text messages, according to leading security expert Graham Cluley. He was speaking as Tesco Bank continued to deal with the fallout from the “systematic, sophisticated attack” that resulted in £2.5m being taken from around 9,000 current account holders.
Meanwhile, another expert says that the Tesco attack last weekend could be the first of many, and banks should be forced by regulators to up their game.
The bank was forced to suspend online banking for all its 136,000 customers after money – in some cases several thousand pounds – was stolen from accounts. It is thought much of it ended up in Spain and Brazil.
Although the number of customers affected was later downgraded from the original 20,000, Tesco has declined to reveal how the money was taken. It did say that personal data had not been compromised, leading some experts to suggest that the fraudsters had gained debit card details, or found a vulnerability in its app.
The National Crime Agency is investigating, but questions are already being asked about levels of security.
It has emerged that Tesco Bank used to issue customers with card readers – small devices that generate a unique passcode when you insert your card and key in your pin. These typically authorise your login and certain transactions. But the bank later moved to mobile phone verification, where it sends a code to your handset.
Cliff Moyce, global head of financial services at technology firm DataArt, told Guardian Money that the financial regulators need to take a stronger line if further incidents are to be prevented.
Moyce, who has worked in financial security for more than 25 years, says Tesco Bank customer losses were “almost certainly” not the result of a TalkTalk-style outside hack, but were more likely caused by a failure of its IT security and data protection processes.
“No bank can ever claim to be 100% secure and attacks by fraudsters are a fact of life. The problem is that the banks need to do a lot better – the regulators need to be forcing them to adopt the best practice… unless this happens it will only be a matter of time before there is another similar episode at another bank,” he says.
One line of investigation is likely to focus on the possibility of an “economic hack”, says Moyce, whereby an offshore employee is offered multiples of their annual salary in return for a tranche of customer data. One thing that might raise eyebrows is that the bank’s staff were seemingly encouraged to use their own smartphones and tablets for work, a trend commonly known as “bring your own device”, or BYOD.
In a 2015 interview Tesco Bank’s then chief information officer, Chris Brocklesby, revealed how he had “championed” BYOD, adding: “A trial has been successful and we will fully roll out in 2015. The initial release will be for phones and tablets.”
Moyce, who admits he has no idea if this was taken up at Tesco Bank, says such a move would be controversial. “BYOD always brings risks, especially in the areas of breaches of the UK Data Protection Act, as it is too easy for confidential and sensitive information to end up in a personal device that may be lost, sold or taken to another employment. There is also a risk of introducing malware into a secure network.”
He suggested good BYOD policies, implemented rigorously, can reduce the risks to the same level as any company-supplied devices. The question is whether your bank is operating good policies and practices.
Professor Alan Woodward, banking security expert at the University of Surrey, says he was surprised Tesco has been so coy about what actually happened. “The fact they have said that customers’ personal data was not compromised suggests that the hackers may have harvested customers’ debit card details and then used them in an automated mass attack. They really need to come out and give more details.”
He says this is the first successful attack on a bank itself. Previously, fraudsters have targeted individual customers. He also predicts that security will become one of the ways some banks sell themselves in the future.
Last month the consumer group Which? criticised some of Britain’s biggest banks for failing to invest in security systems that would better protect their customers from fraudsters. It tested the UK’s 11 biggest banks and building societies and found that the security at five was not good enough.
It said Halifax, its sister brand Bank of Scotland, Lloyds, Santander and TSB had “consistently scored poorly” over the four years it had been analysing their security measures.
None offered “two-factor authentication” at login, despite having the technology to do so. This combines two different types of ID checks – typically something you know, such as a password or pin, with something you have, such as a card reader or a mobile phone on which to generate or receive a single-use passcode.
Tesco Bank, which was not tested by Which?, is a leading challenger bank – the new entrants trying to topple the domination of the traditional players – mostly appealing to younger customers with the promise of a user-friendly, hi-tech approach.
On a Tesco Bank web forum in 2015, a bank employee wrote: “It is hard to get the balance of security and convenience right for everyone using our online banking service. We used to have a card reader to protect online banking; however the overwhelming feedback from customers was that they didn’t like this method and they wanted something more portable. This was why we implemented a solution that allows our customers to receive a security code to their mobile phone.”
Some people, reading that now, may wonder whether the bank was right to make such a change.
Nationwide, which is one of the providers that still uses card readers, says on its website that it “provides an extra level of security when banking online... your card reader helps to prevent fraudsters from trying to log in as you, and transferring your money.”
Tesco Bank is not alone in shunning readers. Cluley says consumers can continue to trust online banking – for now. “Clearly this is not good news, but at the moment this is one incident. However, if it happens to a second bank then this would be a major source of concern that could result in a loss of trust.”
He says he is still happy to bank online as the risks are still outweighed by the convenience.
However, he suggests that consumers should be looking for a bank that avoids the use of text messages as a way of identifying their customer when logging on or making a payment.
“The banks are moving away from these as they are open to exploitation.Card readers that produce a code are much more secure.” He adds: “I always use a made-up mother’s maiden name. Only I know what I have picked and, unlike the real one, it’s not publicly available information.”
Tesco Bank told us that “robust security measures” are in place to protect customers. It says that as a security measure, to add a payee, customers are required to enter their unique security code, following which they will be sent a text confirming the new payee.
However, it adds: “To access the app, customers need to enter their unique security code.”
As Christmas gets nearer shoppers stuck for ideas will be thinking of turning to that old standby, the gift card. Such cards and vouchers – in either plastic, paper or digital form – have long been a go-to option for shoppers with tricky-to-buy-for loved ones – the industry is now worth £5bn a year.
But gift cards have their downsides, one of which is that there is no guarantee they will be honoured if the retailer goes bust. They are undeniably convenient, however. Here we outline the pros and cons, and what you can do if you receive an unwanted gift card.
Virtual vouchers 
Buying a gift card or voucher used to involve almost as much effort as purchasing a gift: you needed to go into the relevant store and purchase one over the counter. But consumers are increasingly able to do this online, and the recipients can use them both in-store and over the internet. Several big brands, including Marks & Spencer, now sell “e-gift cards” or “e-vouchers” as well as physical gift cards.
Paper or plastic gift cards accounted for more than 80% of the vouchers issued in 2015, according to industry trade body the UK Gift Card & Voucher Association (UKGCVA), but it says digital cards are on the rise.
Delivery charges 
If you are going to send a physical gift card look out for delivery charges. Some retailers will charge extra for delivering cards of a higher value, despite it being the same piece of plastic. For example, John Lewis charges £2 to deliver a gift card with a value of £10-£50, £3 for between £50.01 and £99.99, and £5.75 for £100-plus.
Amazon, however, doesn’t charge any more if you select a physical rather than virtual card, and M&S charges £3.50 for standard home delivery, though it offers free delivery when you spend more than £50.
Retailers who do charge say the cost is to cover the extra value being sent and insured by special delivery with Royal Mail. Others are technically covering that cost for you, as you will still be protected if you can prove a card is lost or damaged. This is because Royal Mail covers all items sent by post, but the level of protection depends on the delivery method.
Packages sent by standard post – either 1st or 2nd class – that are lost or damaged are only covered up to the value of £20, while the more expensive special delivery option covers up to £500. This is the same level of protection you would get if you were sending the card yourself by post, but if you are sending high-value items then Royal Mail lets you purchase extra consequential loss cover starting from around £4.
What if the company goes bust? 
There have been several high profile company failures in recent years, which have left people with gift cards they can’t use. There is no set rule on the status of gift cards in the event of a company going bust. It tends to be up to the retailer or administrator, but generally you will be low down – or at the bottom of – the pecking order of creditors.
For example, when HMV went into administration in January 2013 the company at first refused to accept vouchers before later backtracking. When BHS followed suit shoppers with gift vouchers were only allowed to use them as part-payment for goods.
Hannah Maundrell of comparison website Money.co.uk says: “Vouchers can switch from being a great gift to worthless in seconds if the retailer goes bust. There’s a chance you might not be left out of pocket, but you need to be quick. Some retailers accept gift vouchers for a while after entering administration, but you might be limited to in-store purchases and could need to spend a certain amount to redeem them.”
The best way to avoid this is to spend the vouchers as soon as you receive them. If, however, the retailer refuses to cash a voucher the person who bought them may be able to recoup their value from their bank through a “chargeback” claim if they paid by debit card.
If the voucher was worth more than £100 and bought on credit card they could also make a section 75 claim. Maundrell says: “If neither scenario applies there’s only one option: making a claim with the administrators. Don’t be too hopeful, you’ll be bottom of the list for payouts, and even then you’re likely to get a fraction back at most.”
You could instead consider buying someone a multi-store gift card that lets them choose from a number of brands. One of the best-known is the One4all gift card – but watch out for the fact that after 18 months the card imposes a 90p-a-month “inactive balance charge” which will continue to swipe money off it “until such time as the balance on the card is zero”.
Watch out for expiry dates 
While cash can be eaten by inflation, a bigger risk with gift cards is that they expire – around £300m of them go unspent each year, according to the UKGCVA. Vouchers for experiences such as an afternoon tea typically need to be redeemed within a year, but can be extended for a charge. Those for goods tend to last longer, says Gail Cohen, director general of the association. “Gift cards generally have expiry dates of not less than 24 months from date of purchase. It is down to the retailer to decide if they want to have an expiry date policy,” she says.
You will usually find expiry dates and conditions displayed on the back of the card with a link to the general terms and conditions. Some vouchers, such as Theatre Tokens, have no expiry date.
What to do with unwanted gift cards 
If you receive an unwanted gift card there are marketplaces on which to sell them. You can list cards on eBay or dedicated platforms such as Zeek. The latter lets users buy and sell unwanted physical or digital cards or vouchers worth between £10 and £500 at a discount. For example, if you received a card from Sports Direct but are more into technology, you could sell your card and instead buy a discounted iTunes voucher. Alternatively, you could just sell it for cash.
To sell a voucher on Zeek you have to fill in the required details, and may have to upload a photo. The brand must have at least five branches to qualify, so you can’t use it for online retailers. You set your own discount to attract buyers, but bear in mind that for each sale you make you will be charged a processing fee of 7% of the card’s value (minimum £3).
Cards typically sell within a day, according to Zeek, which offers buyers a 60-day 100% money-back guarantee if a card is inactive, has an inaccurate balance or wasn’t received within 30 days.
By comparison, eBay charges the seller a 10% processing fee, but there is no guarantee of a sale.
You can walk up on to the South Downs national park from this former toll house that once housed the local shepherd in Offham. It’s been much glamourised since and is dwarfed by its gardens, but is on sale for a mighty price for a two-bedroom bungalow. Offers in excess of £400,000. Onthemarket.com , 01273 283 900
This week we have had confirmation that women are paid less for the same work (Gender pay gap means women ‘working for free from now until 2017’, 10 November) and bear the burden of unpaid work like childcare and housework (Doing the chores valued at £1tn a year in the UK, 10 November). Sadly this is a problem that affects women all around the world. ActionAid estimates that women in developing countries could be $9tn better off – more than the combined GDPs of Britain, France and Germany – if their pay and access to paid work were equal to that of men.
Women are penalised by the expectation that they will do the majority of caring work and are either absent from the workforce or in lower-paid, part-time jobs. As a result women can’t access opportunities on a level playing field and receive less reward for the work they do. It isn’t fair and it isn’t right. If women’s work is to be recognised, rewarded and valued in its entirety – from caring for families and communities, to toiling long hours on the factory floor – we need concerted action to tackle the gender pay gap and the discrimination that gives rise to it.
Sarah Carson
Women’s Rights campaign manager, ActionAid UK
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
What’s going for it? It’s not often we get to use the word “isthmus” on Let’s move to, but today, folks, is the day. For Stranraer sits on one. Google it, if you’re scratching your head trying to remember first-year geography classes. Because Stranraer’s isthmus defines the place. Here Britain narrows to a pinch – the isthmus – before stretching out as the Rhinns, a “broad headland” or “fat nose” – both Gaelic origins of Stranraer’s name. People used to schlep here for the ferry port. The isthmus was a gateway to other lands. But now that’s moved up the coast to Cairnryan the isthmus seems like more of a wall, lending a feeling of isolation to the low hills beyond, suspended in the ocean, as close in spirit and history to Ireland as to the British Isles. On the plus side this is a fabulous place to escape to. Nobody would find you on the edge of the edge about to drop off the mainland, accompanied only by kittiwakes and hunkered down amid old-fashioned shops like Fraser’s butchers and Chinese takeaways preserved from 1974.
The case against Such isolation is not for everyone. It’s taken some hits since the ferry service moved. Regeneration is continuing, but it’ll be a long road. The glorious waterfront needs work. Stranraer can feel a tad drab.
Well connected? Far from the thick of it. Trains: to Ayr (one hour 25 minutes) and Kilmarnock (one hour 50) every couple of hours; a couple a day to Glasgow (two hours 35 minutes). Driving: 90 minutes to Dumfries, an hour and 20 to Ayr, two hours to the M6, a little more to Carlisle.
Schools Primaries: Sheuchan and Belmont “good” or “very good”, says Education Scotland, and Castle Kennedy “very good”. Secondaries: Stranraer Academy is mostly “satisfactory”.
Hang out at… The Central Cafe. Nearby, Knockinaam Lodge for posh.
Where to buy Stranraer is a sprawling low town of cottages and terraces. The centre has a few fragments of old town, but is mostly Victorian. The waterfront has nice stretches up to Agnew Crescent; beyond up to Leswalt for suburbans. On the Rhinns, Portpatrick is a delight, a Victorian holiday resort. Plenty of hamlets like Port Logan to get away from it all. Large detacheds and town houses, £250,000-£325,000. Detacheds and smaller town houses, £140,000-£250,000. Semis, £125,000-£250,000. Terraces, £75,000-£170,000.
Bargain of the week A stunning four-bedroom Edwardian house for £325,000 with ckdgalbraith.co.uk.
Sheena Ramsay “It’s the best of all worlds: a rural location, right by the sea, and a friendly town. Try the seafood restaurant Henrys Bayhouse, which looks straight up Loch Ryan. My kids are at the great Stranraer Academy, and very happy.”
Marion Currie “Nearby Lochinch Castle is a lovely day out, five miles away.”
Live in Stranraer and the Rhinns, Dumfries and Galloway? Join the debate below
• Do you live in Dover? Do you have a favourite haunt or a pet hate? If so, email lets.move@theguardian.com by next Tuesday.
If you’re planning to purchase one of the top 12 toys for Christmas this year, you’d better get a move on. Toy retailers and supermarkets are competing to lure in the first wave of Christmas shoppers to their stores and, toy experts say, will price this year’s must-have toys most keenly over the next fortnight. However, in some cases, stock is already running low.
According to the Toy Retailers’ Association, the top sellers this year will include an interactive bird that hatches itself from an egg, a selfie stick attached to a microphone and a wacky “mouthpiece challenge game” where players must try to say silly phrases wearing a mouthpiece that prevents them from closing their mouth.
The toys are not cheap: they are priced at £53.74 each on average, with four being sold for £90 or more. To help you find the best possible deal, we compared the lowest prices in-store and online (including delivery) of the 12 toys. 
RRP £59.99 (ages five and up)
An interactive bird that pecks its own way out of the egg it arrives in, as long as you cuddle and stroke the egg for about 20 minutes. Once it is hatched, if you continue to provide it with loving attention, it changes its behaviour from a baby to a toddler to a fully-grown Hatchimal that can walk, talk and play games.
Cheapest in-store price: £59.99, but it is sold out at all the major retailers in the UK, apart from a few branches of Argos – check Stockinformer.co.uk for up-to-date information. Limited stock is expected by late November.
This game forces players to try to say phrases such as “He’s my stealthy pet ferret named Garrett” while wearing a transparent mouthpiece that makes it impossible to close your mouth. It’s perfect for drunken dinner parties, apparently.
Cheapest in-store price: Out of stock at Toys R Us, Argos, Smyths, The Entertainer, Tesco, John Lewis and Asda. Tesco has stock of a similar game called Mouth Trap for £19.99.
It’s always summer in this battery-operated Lego amusement park. Walk best friends Naya, Andrea, Emma and Matthew through the turnstiles to take rides on the roller-coaster, ferris wheel and drop tower, or make them queue up for popcorn, hot dogs or a refreshing slice of watermelon.
RRP £89.99 (ages five and up)
With parking spaces for 36 cars, this is the biggest Hot Wheels garage you can buy (until they bring out an even bigger one). It features a light-up fire engine bell, a helicopter pad, two elevators and two ramps – but watch out for the chomping shark lurking at the bottom. Five vehicles and a helicopter are included.
RRP £29.99 (ages eight and up)
This is the fastest motorised dart blaster on the market from Nerf. Take it into battle with you and you can fire five darts per second at targets up to 90 feet away. Comes with 25 darts for the 25-dart drum.
RRP £39.99 (ages three and up)
The PAW Patrol television series inspires a huge following among two- to five-year-olds and its Patroller vehicle toy flew off the shelves last Christmas, with some parents willing to pay triple the retail price after a worldwide sellout. This year’s spin-off is predicted to be another big hit with young children. It includes the character Robodog and transforms from a helicopter into a plane with real lights and sounds.
RRP £19.99 (ages eight and over)
This adjustable selfie stick with a microphone allows you to record yourself singing (or lip syncing) to Justin Bieber, Taylor Swift, Little Mix and thousands of other hit songs, using the free StarMaker app.
Cheapest online price: £17.95, Smyths; £14.95 if you have Amazon Prime
RRP £24.99 (ages five and up)
The Shopkins range of collectible characters continues to be popular with children aged five to eight. This year’s must-have Shopkins toy features two exclusive characters and a cute pink kitchen playset.
Cheapest in-store price: £23.99, Toys R Us, but some branches have sold out; £24.95, Tesco
RRP £19.99 (ages seven and up)
Press a button and this plastic sausage will start randomly shouting at you to dip, poke, shake, stretch and twist it as quickly as you can. The faster you react, the more points you get. You can practise by yourself or take turns playing with family and friends.
Cheapest online price: £18.19, Tesco; £15.19 if you have Amazon Prime
RRP £49.99 (ages four and up)
Like a Hatchimal, this interactive toy responds to your love and attention. Feed it a bottle, rock it to sleep, stroke its fur or tickle its nose and it will react just like a live, breathing puppy. Comes with its own adoption certificate.
RRP £69.99 (ages eight and up)
Star Wars: Rogue One, the latest instalment in the new trilogy, is set to be released in cinemas just before Christmas. Recreate scenes from the film with this Lego version of a rebel fighter plane (complete with four engines, spring-loaded shooters and opening side doors).
RRP £99.99 (three and up)
Use this motorised ramp to send Thomas the Tank Engine soaring off the tracks and two feet into the air before he lands safely on the tracks to continue on his way. When he completes his journey round the rails, Harold the helicopter will lift him to the top of ramp again for another exciting bridge jump.
All prices correct at the time of writing
Twice a week we publish problems that will feature in a forthcoming Dear Jeremy advice column in the Saturday Guardian so that readers can offer their own advice and suggestions. We then print the best of your comments alongside Jeremy’s own insights.
My boss doesn’t like me. I’m not sure why and I have given up trying to figure it out, but it is making my working life really miserable. She undermines me in front of the rest of the team, interrupts constantly with irrelevant asides when I’m trying to lead meetings, leaves me out of meetings I should be included in, and makes constant threats that I might lose my job or someone else more junior might lose theirs if I don’t do some, often irrelevant, task.
I am desperate to leave but feel so undermined by her bullying, favouritism and passive-aggressive behaviour that I feel worthless and useless and unemployable.
She likes to remind me that I am lucky to have a job. I have worked there for 15 years but now feel trapped in a vicious circle. What should I do?
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally. 
While technology has had a huge impact on job hunting, one aspect has remained unchanged: the job interview. And one of the stalwarts of the interviewer’s toolbox is the competency question.
A competency can be either a skill or behaviour. You will be able to spot a competency question because they usually start with: “Tell me about a time when …” or “Give me an example of when you have demonstrated …”
There is a classic approach for answering these types of questions known as the Star technique, and if you master it you will be giving the interviewers a well-structured answer that makes it easy to assess you against the person specification. It is also beneficial to you – it gives you a structure to shape your answer around. This can prevent you from waffling or going off on a tangent. Here’s how to use it:
Situation This gives context to your answer so it might include where you were working at the time, what your role was and any brief background information.
Task You need to communicate what you were trying to do or achieve in the example.
Action Describe what actions you took to manage the task in that particular situation.
Result Show how you made a difference, added value or had an impact on the bottom line. The outcome can be quantifiable or anecdotal.
Remember, it is impossible to have a successful interview without proper preparation, so putting in the time to prepare some Star examples is more likely to win you the job.
Here are some typical competency based questions, with example answers using the Star technique:
Q: Describe a time when you have had to work as a team to solve a problem
A: When I worked at ... as a ..., there was a particular time when we had to work together to solve a specific problem which was ... My role within the team was ... and as a result I could see that for us to be successful we needed to do ... I had to negotiate with ... and persuade them that this was a good idea by showing the benefits to the team and the impact on the problem. We managed to deliver the project on time, and I also calculated we saved/improved ... too. Our manager fed back that this was really innovative approach to problem solving by the team.
For this question the interviewers are looking for two competencies: working as part of a team towards a shared goal, and problem solving. Your example must contain both elements. Think about what your role was in the team. Were you the leader, the morale booster, the motivator, the ideas person or the timekeeper? All roles are valuable so don’t feel you have to change your style, but do think about the job and how it fits in the team. Make sure your example conveys how your role affected the team’s success, and how you contributed towards solving the problem.
Q: Give an example of the most difficult decision you’ve had to make
A: In my current role at ... I recently had to manage/work with a new staff member. After ... weeks in the role I could see they were struggling with some aspects of the role, and people were noticing that their performance was not consistent, which impacted on the team’s work. They were still on probation, and I was tasked with deciding whether to extend their probation. The decision was difficult because ... so I gathered as much information as I could including ..., and I spoke to my manager. I concluded that the staff member had not had enough support at key times because ... and extended their probation with a support plan. They responded well and now a year later they are one of the best performers on the team.
The interviewers want to understand how you approach decisions – do you gather facts and information, look at precedents, use instinct and intuition, do you involve others and when do you get support. They are also interested in why a decision is difficult for you, so you need to structure your answer to show both elements.
Q: Tell me about a time you demonstrated initiative
A: When I managed ... project at ... I inherited a number of processes, some of which were well established and effective and some where I could see they created more work for my team. I initiated a team meeting to focus on one process that I felt was holding us back because ... At the meeting we brainstormed ideas to improve the process and agreed a way forward. I then organised a sub team to pilot the changes and report back. When I was happy the process worked, we rolled it out. The difference it made to the success of the project included ..., which was evidenced by ...
Think of an example that shows you taking an innovative approach to something at work or in a society, whether this is creating a new product, improving a system or process, or acting swiftly to capitalise on the situation.
Q: Give an example of when you have demonstrated effective communication skills
A: My manager asked me to present a controversial proposal to senior management on ... I knew there would be resistance from ... because of a potential overlap with their team. I arranged to meet them before the proposal to listen to their concerns and to explain how things could work. In the presentation I showed how I had accommodated their concerns while retaining the focus of the project, by ... The proposal was accepted and the feedback was very positive.
Communication skills are very broad so you need to think about which skills the interviewers are particularly interested in: influencing, negotiating, writing, presenting – and choose an example accordingly.
If you want to shine in your next interview then practice the Star technique, using these examples to shape and fine-tune your personal experience. It is a methodical approach that once mastered, enables you to give a seamless performance that can take you one step closer to being offered the job.
Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs or sign up to Guardian Careers for the latest job vacancies and career advice
 In the hallowed shadow of St Nicholas church, medieval exorcists used to do battle with evil spirits and, according to local lore, with objectionable neighbours. The last exorcism performed in this property in Chapel Lane, King’s Lynn, Norfolk, in the 16th century, is said to have been on a local woman who was then burned at the stake in the town square. Photographs by Neil Longdin/William H Brown
How insurers are watching you online, and is it time to switch energy provider?
The total value of all the unpaid work done by the UK population, mostly by women – from cooking meals and cleaning the house to childcare, DIY and gardening – has been officially valued at £1tn a year by the country’s top statisticians.
The Office for National Statistics (ONS), which published the figures, found that women put in more than double the proportion of unpaid work when it comes to cooking, childcare and housework but men can claim bragging rights when it comes to ferrying family members and others around.
To coincide with the new data, the ONS has launched an “unpaid work calculator” that will allow people to work out the value of all the unpaid work they do, which may help to settle once and for all some of those arguments about who does the lion’s share of the chores, and who is getting off lightly.
The calculator uses 2016 data on earnings to estimate how much an individual could earn for doing these tasks – if they could only find someone to pay them.
The department said its figures showed that unpaid work had a total value of £1.01tn in 2014, which was equivalent to approximately 56% of the UK’s gross domestic product (GDP).
The ONS said women carry out an overall average of 60% more unpaid work than men. On average, men do 16 hours a week of cooking, childcare, adult care, and housework, which includes laundry and cleaning. But for women the figure is 26 hours.
“The only area where men put in more unpaid work hours than women is in the provision of transport - this includes driving themselves and others around, as well as commuting to work,” said a spokesman.
Women do more unpaid work than men in every age group, from the 25-and-under age category to the 56-and-over category.
The average man would earn £166.63 more per week if his unpaid work was remunerated, whereas the average woman would earn £259.63.
“So not only do women do an average of 60% more unpaid work in terms of hours, they also tend to do the work that has a higher value,” said the ONS.
According to the calculator, one hour of housework (which also includes DIY and gardening) a week is “worth” £8.58 per week or £446 a year. One hour of childcare a week is valued at £15.28 a week or £795 a year. For cooking meals, it’s £7.63 or £397, while for transport – such as driving children to their clubs and commuting to work – it’s £11.24 or £584.
Overall, 36- to 45-year-olds carried out the most unpaid work, putting in 27.4 mean hours per week of unpaid work, followed by 26- to 35-year-olds.
The figures also revealed that people on lower incomes tended to carry out on average more unpaid work than other income brackets, with some exceptions, such as transport.
The Pensions Regulator is seeking millions of pounds from Dominic Chappell and Retail Acquisitions in relation to the £571m deficit in the BHS pension scheme.
Sources close to the situation say warning notices sent by the regulator to Chappell and his company show it wants to receive “multiples of £1m”.
The regulator has started legal proceedings against the former BHS owners Chappell and Sir Philip Green in an attempt to fill the pension deficit.
The exact details of the regulator’s claims are unclear. Any party that reveals the details of the warning notice sent to them risks breaking the law.
The claims against Chappell and Retail Acquisitions are likely to relate to the amount of money they took out of BHS and the sale of assets during their 13 months as owners of the department store chain.
The parliamentary committee that investigated the demise of BHS accused Chappell of having “his fingers in the till” and helping oversee the “systematic plunder” of the retailer.
Retail Acquisitions, which is 90% owned by Chappell, collected an estimated £17m from BHS after buying it for £1 from Green in March 2015. The company sold off BHS’s flagship store on Oxford Street and its warehouse in Atherstone, Warwickshire, with some of the proceeds used to pay off a loan Retail Acquisitions had taken out.
The regulator is seeking about £300m from Green, but its legal claim against Chappell is significant and raises further questions about how well BHS was managed under his ownership. While Green is a billionaire tycoon, Chappell is a serial bankrupt.
BHS collapsed into administration in April, leading to the loss of 11,000 jobs. Green controlled the retailer between 2000 and 2015, during which time his family and other shareholders collected more than £580m. 
The regulator announced last week that it had sent warning notices to Green, Chappell and their respective companies, Taveta and Retail Acquisitions. The regulator has not disclosed any of the details in the warning notices, but they run to more than 300 pages and explain why it believes the parties are liable to financially support the BHS pension scheme.
The notices are understood to set a range for the financial contribution sought from Green and Chappell, rather than a single figure.
The pair have about six months to reply to the regulator and set out their case. When they do, a determinations panel at the regulator, which is independent of the investigations team, will decide whether they have to make a contribution and how much it should be.
The regulator launched an anti-avoidance investigation into BHS in March 2015 after it was sold. The regulator has trawled through nearly 100,000 documents and held talks with the parties involved.
Lesley Titcomb, the chief executive of the Pension Regulator, has said she is still open to agreeing a settlement over the scheme’s funding. Last week, she said the warning notices had been issued after a “complex investigation” and the regulator was yet to receive a “sufficiently credible and comprehensive offer” to bail out the BHS pension scheme, which has more than 20,000 members.
The scheme is currently in an assessment period with the Pension Protection Fund. If a deal or settlement with Green cannot be reached, the scheme will eventually enter the PPF, where the members’ benefits will be cut by at least 10%.
In June, Green told MPs he would sort the problems facing the scheme. However, no deal has been forthcoming and the tycoon was photographed on his new yacht during the summer.
Last month, the House of Commons voted unanimously to strip Green of his knighthood, which was awarded a decade ago for services to retail. During a fiery debate in parliament, Green was lambasted and described as a “billionaire spiv”.
The vote is advisory, as the power to rescind a knighthood rests with the honours forfeiture committee, a group of civil servants and dignitaries.
Pensions experts have warned that a legal battle about the BHS scheme could take years. Although the regulator can legally force Green and Chappell to make a payment, they can take an appeal against such a decision to the supreme court.
The regulator and Chappell declined to comment.
This week the eyes of the world were on the US, where its first-ever female presidential nominee vied to become its first-ever female president.
But it was not to be: despite leading the popular vote, Hillary Clinton was unable to secure the number of electoral college votes required to win; and so, in her words, she had “not shattered that highest and hardest glass ceiling”.
But it’s not just the world’s most powerful office that remains out of women’s reach. The gender pay gap still exists, and women in Iceland recently downed tools at the moment in the working day after which women effectively work for free: Icelandic women shortened their day by 14% to represent the fact that women there, on average, earn 14% less than men.
In the UK (and in France), Equal Pay Day marks the same effect on an annual scale. Here it falls today, 10 November, meaning that in 2016, on average, women effectively stopped earning 51 days before the end of the year, relative to men.
This actually marks an improvement: applying the same methodology as the Fawcett Society does in calculating Equal Pay Day shows that, 20 years ago, that gap was 76 days, meaning the date would have fallen almost a month earlier, on 16 October.
The improvement has not been consistent: it fell back in 1998, 2006, 2008 and 2011. Between 2012 and 2013, men’s average hourly pay grew at almost twice the rate of that of women, shifting Equal Pay Day back by three days.
But despite an overall positive trend, the Fawcett Society estimates that it will take another 62 years, at the current rate of progress, for the UK to reach pay parity.
Equal Pay Day is calculated by applying the mean gender pay gap to the calendar year. Provisional figures for 2016 indicate that the gap between men and women’s full-time average wages in the UK is 13.9%. As a proportion of the calendar year (366 days, as this is a leap year), 13.9% = 51 days.
NB: the dates we have used for previous years may differ slightly from the official Equal Pay Days, because the Fawcett Society’s dates are based on provisional ONS data, while our calculations are based on revised figures.
A plan to restrict second home ownership in a picture postcard Cornish harbour town has been boosted after a high court judge ruled its proposal did not breach human rights legislation.
The decision means that St Ives, beloved of art lovers, surfers and beach fans, is a step closer to being able to enforce a planning provision allowing the building of new houses only if they are reserved to people who live in the area full time.
It is also likely to trigger similar moves by other communities where local people are forced out by soaring prices driven up by second home owners elsewhere in Cornwall and the UK.
St Minver, the parish that includes the north Cornwall holiday hotspots of Rock and Polzeath, already has a similar policy planned and was waiting for the judgment before putting it to its residents.
Mevagissey and Polperro in south Cornwall are also considering the inclusion of such a policy in their plans.
The 12,000 parishioners of St Ives voted overwhelmingly in May in favour of the neighbourhood development plan that includes the planning provision.
St Ives town council and Cornwall council were challenged, however, by the local land agent RLT Architects, which argued that the plan infringed the rights of people who live in a capitalist society to buy property where they want.
Sitting in Bristol, Mr Justice Hickinbottom ruled that the plan was not incompatible with article eight of the European convention on human rights, which states: “Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his correspondence” and, except in certain circumstances, “there shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right”.
The judge said: “The council considered the article eight implications in detail before determining that the policy was justified … The council considered that further development in St Ives was unsustainable without the restriction.”
Cornwall council welcomed the judgment and said it meant town and parish councils with similar policies in their neighbourhood plans would also be able to include a similar restriction.
Edwina Hannaford, Cornwall council’s cabinet member for planning, said: “This is a hugely important judgment for Cornwall, St Ives town council and for the residents of St Ives who wanted to ensure that any new homes in the town would be the resident’s sole or main residence.
“We also know that a number of other local communities, both in Cornwall and across the rest of the country, are also interested in including similar policies in their own neighbourhood plans and have been watching this case with interest.”
Chris Tofts, RLT’s solicitor, said the hearing had given some clarity about how the policy might work. “Cornwall council submitted that a person whose principal residence is in St Ives can work away from that home without being in breach of the policy. Much will turn in the future on how the term ‘principal residence’ is applied.”
Tofts said it could result in people wanting to buy in St Ives targeting old homes in the historic centre rather than on the outskirts, where most new homes tend to be built. “It is anticipated that these town centre homes will now command an additional premium to reflect them being free of the restriction.”
According to the plan, in 2011 25% of residential properties in St Ives were second homes, an increase of almost 70% from 2001. 
There is concern among some that the policy may make St Ives seem unwelcoming. Carl Lamb, the town’s business improvement district manager said: “The vote does not mean that St Ives does not welcome all-comers.
“The town has been voted the number one seaside destinations in the UK many times, not only for its charm, beautiful beaches and top quality food, but for its friendliness and welcoming attitude as a community and a town. That will never change.”
The people of Liverpool could be asked to vote on whether they should pay up to 10% more council tax to help their “desperate” local authority maintain public services in the face of government cuts.
Joe Anderson, Liverpool’s mayor, wants to hold a public referendum – the first of its kind in the UK – to ask residents whether they would support a significant rise above the 3.99% cap.
The council is warning that if it does not increase tax then it faces cuts to all its services, with adult social care and children’s services the hardest hit. Anderson said that all council-run services, including libraries, sports centres, maintenance of parks, highway repairs, street cleaning and rubbish collections, would have to be cut by 50%.
He admitted that the local authority had no funds left, even for basic services. Laying out its parlous financial situation, he said: “We are in an absolutely desperate situation and in order to protect our services for the people of Liverpool we will have to make some tough choices. We can’t manage the budget without serious cuts and serious consequences. It’s a daunting task. And that’s why I will be asking the question, whether people would support us, in a referendum.”
City council bosses say cuts in funding from the government mean they will no longer be able to fund even basic services without raising more cash. At present the council is not allowed to raise council tax by more than 3.99% – half of which is ringfenced for social services – without holding a local referendum.
Anderson plans to implement this increase in full next year but says it still falls far short of the £90m the council needs over the next three years. His solution is to ask people if they would support a referendum for an even steeper hike to pay for social services. If the 10% were agreed through the referendum the rise would come into effect in 2018.
In the meantime Anderson said he would be proposing the maximum increase of 3.99% in council tax next year. “Of that, 2% is ringfenced for adult social care, but the requirement of social services is far beyond that. The fact of the matter is that if we took a 10% cut to adult social care and a 10% cut to children’s care then we would still have cut all the other services by 50%. That shows the scale of the problem that we face.”
He added: “If we closed all of our 19 libraries, scrapped our nine sports centres, cut all spend on culture, stopped maintaining the parks, halted all the highways repairs and street cleansing, and switched off 50,000 lights that would only save us £68m – and we need to find £90m.”
Now the council is preparing to put online a “budget simulator”, on 17 November, so the public can see the impact of changing priorities in spending. If people overwhelmingly agree with the principle of a referendum, while using the simulator, the council will propose a real referendum at a cost of £350,000 to the public purse.
Anderson said: “This is basically taking a straw poll in the simulator and I will make a decision based on that as to whether we go for a referendum, which would take place next year. That would mean we only get the money in 2018, but knowing it was coming would allow us to change the way we approach the three-year budget.”
The local authority spends £152m on adult social care and £95m on children’s social services. Anderson denied that the referendum was a gimmick to attract publicity.
He said: “I will be pointing out the severity of the challenges that we face. This is not a gimmick, the council budget simulator, but a serious attempt to engage council taxpayers in not only understanding the financial state we’re in, but have a say in what we can do, or should do.
“I accept people may say we elected you as mayor to find a solution, but it shouldn’t be just left to me and my group alone, given the serious choices. A lot of the decisions we have made in the past, and many we will have to make in the future, have been heartbreaking.
“In the past we have relied on 80% government grants. That has been reduced by 58% – £340m – and over the next three years we have to find another £90m.”
At present, residents with properties in band A – the band accounting for the majority of homes in Liverpool – pay the lowest rate of council tax, with bills of £1,116.97. So a 3.99% rise next year would raise bills by £44.57 to £1,161.54.
If people back a 10% rise the following year council taxes will increase by £116.15, or more than £2 a week extra in 2018-19. For a band D property, which pays £1,675.46 this year, a 3.99% rise next year will take bills up £66.85 a year to £1,742.31. A 10% rise the following year will mean an increase of £174.23 to a total bill of £1,916.54.
The amount of time parents spent caring for children has fallen since the year 2000, with grandparents and siblings stepping in to offer unpaid help, according to figures from the Office for National Statistics.
New data for unpaid work shows the average amount of time parents devote each day to childcare fell by 5.7%, from an average of 1 hour and 33 minutes per parent in 2000 to 1 hour and 27 minutes in 2015. Over the same period, the average amount of care provided by people over 60 and siblings increased.
ONS analysis also showed that women spend 60% more time cooking, childcare and doing housework than men, recording 26 hours a week in unpaid work of this sort compared with 16. The statisticians said women on maternity leave were doing the most unpaid work, recording 60 hours a week.
The only area where men did more unpaid work hours than women was in the provision of transport, which included driving themselves and others around as well as commuting.
Highlighting the squeeze on people in their middle age who may have elderly parents to look after as well as grandchildren, the amount of time those aged over 50 spend looking after adults has risen markedly. In 2015, men over 50 spent 15% more time giving unpaid care to adults than in 2000, while women spent 21% more time.
The ONS said that mothers provided 74% of childcare in 2015. It estimated the total value of childcare was £132.4bn, while adult care was worth just under £8bn.
Fathers with children of pre-school age had increased their share of childcare, spending 90.7 minutes a day on all kinds of care from feeding to reading, compared with 86.7 minutes in 2000.
Among over-60s, females saw the amount of childcare they provided grow by 22.4%, to an average of 9.9 minutes a day. The amount of care they gave at weekends fell, but was offset by a rise in the provision of weekend childcare by men aged 60 and over.
“This may represent a shift in behaviour, where older males are now helping out more with childcare (likely for grandchildren) particularly on weekends,” the ONS said.
Women on maternity leave typically spent up 37 hours a week in active engagement with their child or children, eight hours of cooking, seven hours doing housework, two hours doing laundry and six hours transporting themselves or others around.
The ONS has a calculator to allow people to work out how much the unpaid work they do is worth.
Hello and welcome to this week’s Money Talks – a roundup of the week’s biggest stories and some things you may have missed.
‘Switch and save’ say energy experts, as fixed-rate tariffs end
Triple-lock pension should be scrapped, say MPs
Rise in sales of £1m-plus homes despite high stamp duty bills
Homebuyers return but struggle to find suitable properties, says Rics
The ground rent scandal that is engulfing new home buyers
Admiral may have been forced to pull plans to use Facebook to find out more about customers, but insurers are using a wealth of personal information to set your premiums – in some cases looking at how much you spend on your weekly shopping
I’ve tried everything to get a BT line, but to no avail
A minor shunt that brought my credit rating crashing down
Seeing red when my London Bus Driving School course disappears
Save up to 10% with Guardian home insurance, provided by Uinsure. Get a quote in just 60 seconds.
If you need to send money overseas you can get expert advice and free online transfers with moneycorp, providers of the Guardian money transfer service.
On Monday night, the curtain came down on the government’s consultation on plans to fully digitise taxation in the UK by 2020. This will create significant challenges for many micro businesses and sole traders, some experts warn.
In the March 2015 budget, the government set out its “vision for a transformed tax system”, later publishing a roadmap – Making Tax Digital [pdf] – with David Gauke MP (then financial secretary, now chief secretary to the treasury) penning the foreword. “In every walk of life, people are embracing the digital revolution,” he observed, with “millions benefiting from the convenience and simplicity of digital services.”
The government wants to “eradicate bureaucratic form filling”, wrote Gauke, “eliminate unnecessary time delays” and give taxpayers digital accounts, where information is uploaded automatically, heralding the end of annual tax returns.
In practice, this means that “come 2020, small businesses and self-employed people earning more than £10,000 a year will manage their tax affairs through an online account, which will need updating at least every quarter,” explains chartered tax adviser Andrew Jackson, head of tax at Southampton-based accountancy firm Fiander Tovell LLP. He is also chair of the tax panel at UK200Group.
“Digital tax accounts will provide an overview of income tax or corporation tax, VAT and national insurance contributions, as well as income and expenses each quarter,” he adds. “The tax system is being fully digitalised to reduce accidental errors by taxpayers, improve information flow and reduce the admin burden for everyone, which I welcome – assuming the technology works. But I’m not convinced we’ll see all the benefits HMRC is looking for.”
Jackson is concerned small businesses will face an increase in administration, particularly around new reporting requirements, and make investing in accounting software and staff training a necessity.
“Larger companies have accounts people and sophisticated accounting software, making the switch much easier. But many small firms will have to buy accounting software and have someone to input data and update records regularly.”
However, according to the government, many businesses might not in fact need to buy new software. Its digital roadmap states: “Businesses will be required to use digital tools, such as software or apps, to keep records of their income and expenditure. HMRC will ensure that free apps and software are available.” There’s also time to adapt – some businesses will be affected as early as April 2018, but the changes will be more widely phased in thereafter.
The consultation, which closed this week, invited comments on how the government could simplify the payment of taxes, including whether to align payment dates and bring them closer to the point when profits arise, so that businesses make a single regular payment to cover all tax owed. And whereas now business owners might need to contact different HMRC departments, the new system will provide a single view across all liabilities.
But Jackson questions the government’s approach to introducing the changes. “We seem to be legislating the new reporting system, then trying to set up mechanisms for it. I fear that the cart has been put before the horse. Once the government has worked out exactly what the new system should look like – with infrastructure fully tested – only then should it be legislated.”
Elaine Clark, founder and managing director of CheapAccounting.co.uk, which provides online accounting services to hundreds of small businesses, says the proposal to make tax digital was initiated partly because the business community wanted to know how much tax it owed as it went along, rather than waiting until the end of the year.
“Digitalising the system will certainly enable that – although HMRC may demand tax due sooner,” she adds. “I’d expect accounts and bookkeeping to move up the priority list for many small businesses come 2020.
“Some owners will need to change their approach to managing their financial records, because there are likely to be penalties for late filing. The old approach of popping along to your accountant with a carrier bag full of invoices, receipts and bank statements once a year will be gone forever.”
Clark sees the need for small business owners to stay on top of their books as a good thing, with far-reaching consequences. “Remaining aware of your income, costs, profit and cash in the bank is key to success. You can react quicker to situations and make decisions based on up-to-date, rather than historical, financial data. That should deliver better outcomes.”
But finding the time to update accounts and get to grips with accounting software may be a challenge for some. “The fortunate few will be able to pay others to take care of their day-to-day bookkeeping,” she says, adding that the majority will have to find the time to do it themselves. And of course, infrastructure may be an issue in parts of the country that don’t have the broadband capabilities to upload the necessary files.
Mike Cherry, national chairman of the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB), says the organisation recognises the benefits the changes will have for some small businesses. “However, the business community still has fundamental concerns around the proposals, including on mandatory quarterly tax reporting,” he adds. “We estimate that the average small business could face costs of £2,770 from this reform.” This, at a time when the community faces an increase in the national minimum wage, pensions auto-enrolment and the taxation of dividends.
Cherry says the FSB believes more time is needed before implementation begins to ensure costs can be mitigated. “This includes publication of a full impact assessment detailing the new system’s costs and benefits, a comprehensive round of user-testing, an extensive period of consultation and adequate time for HMRC to take on board required changes.”
The treasury select committee, chaired by Andrew Tyrie, has recently expressed concerns to the chancellor that the consultation and implementation of Making Tax Digital (MTD) has been rushed. The committee heard evidence from a number of tax experts, which supported the FSB’s estimation of the cost of the programme for small businesses. At the time of the hearing, Tyrie said: “Nothing like enough has been done, so far, to ensure that this [MTD] proposal does not harm many of Britain’s small businesses. As things stand, it looks as if the effect will be to transfer part of the costs of HMRC’s IT investment to businesses, along with a heap of administration.”
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
In April I registered with the London Bus Driving School. I paid £1,750 by debit card and was given a date in June for the first training session. I was told that I would be contacted by an instructor a week before. Three days before the lesson I had heard nothing and was told that due to problems at the Driver & Vehicle Standards Agency the training would be postponed for a week.
A week later, I received a message letting me know that the company had ceased trading. I asked my bank to issue a chargeback but it told me that since the company has not gone into liquidation, it can’t help. NS, London
There’s nothing on the company’s website to suggest that there’s a problem except that the phone number no longer works. But the two prominent photos of red Transport for London double-deckers are misleading. TfL says it has never heard of the company, which is not authorised to train people to drive public buses. The only way to do that is to train with one of the contracted bus operators. The firm, which trades as LGV Drivers Training Ltd, is still listed as “active” on the Companies House register but a spokesperson for Companies House confirms that the process has begun to strike it off as it has failed to file annual accounts.
If you had paid by credit card you could have claimed a refund via your card issuer under Section 75 of the Consumer Credit Act. Debit cards don’t have such legal protection and the chargeback scheme, which covers thwarted transactions, is voluntary. However, your bank’s response is misleading. Whether or not the company has gone into liquidation, it is still in breach of contract so your claim should be considered under chargeback rules.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
Q In 2007, my boyfriend and I bought a house together for £257,000 plus fees. At the time, I put in around £66,400 and he put in £20,300. Our initial interest-only mortgage was £180,000 plus the arrangement fee of £781.88, which was added to the loan.
We would like to draw up an agreement that reflects our different shares in the property as I feel it is important to reflect money invested initially. However, there have also been further investments along the way – for example, I recently paid £45,000 for the loft to be converted – and we are having difficulty working out what counts and whether the time of contribution makes a difference.
Other complications are that my boyfriend is a plumber and he has done a fair bit of work to the property in terms of heating, boiler maintenance etc, which otherwise I would have had to pay a significant amount for. I, in turn have done tiling work. Should this kind of investment in kind be counted and reflected in our respective contributions? 
I would appreciate it if you would help us to stop arguing about this and reflect our contributions in the best possible way. TF
A Thank you for your timely reminder to any unmarried joint purchasers about to buy property that they should pay attention when their solicitor asks them whether they want to draw up a deed of trust. The answer should be, “Yes, please”, as such a deed can set out, among other things, what share each person owns, who is responsible for paying what, and the procedure that should be followed when one or more of the joint owners want to go their separate ways. Having a deed of trust is especially important when each person is contributing differing amounts to the deposit, buying costs or mortgage repayments.
Most standard deeds of trust set out what each person will get back on sale of the property either as fixed amounts or fixed percentages, or a mixture of both. So, for example, if one of you put down £20,000 and the other £10,000, but you split the mortgage equally, on sale and after clearing the mortgage debt, person one would get their £20,000 back, person two, their £10,000 with anything left over being split down the middle.
However, an increasing number of people are finding that this kind of fixed approach does not suit the kind of situation you find yourself in, where uneven contributions have been made over time. To address this, you can ask for a kind of “floating” deed to be drawn up, which, instead of giving fixed amounts or percentages, gives a formula to be used to calculate each owner’s share at the point the property is sold or one owner buys the other out.
There is no hard line on what the formula should be but using the figures you sent me and assuming a purchase price in 2007 of £257,000 and a mortgage of 18,0781.88 – it could go something like this:
Your total contributions as a couple would be £148,711.38 (ie £126,411.38 plus £22,300), a figure that enables you to calculate the percentage you have each contributed to the value of the property. So your share as a percentage is 85% while your boyfriend’s is 15%. So if you were to sell the property, after paying off the mortgage and paying selling fees, whatever was left over would be split 85:15 in your favour. You boyfriend’s share is so low largely because you have an interest-only mortgage, which means that he has made no repayment of capital unlike you, who have made overpayments.
I’m not convinced, however, that choosing the formula above is going to stop arguments. Your boyfriend may feel – in many respects justifiably – that he has contributed whatever it would have cost you to pay a different plumber or other professional to carry out works on the house. Similarly, you may feel that the time you spent on tiling work deserves recognition in the figures. You should also be aware that until a formal agreement is drawn up with the help of a legal professional, how much you get if you were to split will be based on the agreement you had at the point of purchase.
Women will in effect work for free for the rest of the year because of the gender pay gap, which will take 60 years to close at the current rate of progress, campaigners say.
The Fawcett Society called for more action from the government and employers to tackle pay discrimination, job “segregation” and help women into senior posts.
Thursday has been labelled equal pay day (EPD), with the society saying the 13.9% pay gap means women are in effect working for nothing from now until the end of the year.
The Fawcett Society chief executive, Sam Smethers, said: “A root cause of the gender pay gap is that we don’t value the work done by women. As we mark EPD this year, we are focusing on the fundamental question of who and what we value and asking why it is that we don’t value women and the work they do – paid or unpaid.
“Equal value goes to the heart of the fight for pay equality, because the reality is that if it is a sector dominated by women the pay will be lower. As we look ahead to a UK outside the EU and possibly the single market, we have to guard against the risk of going backwards and losing some of the rights that women have fought for over many years.”
The society says in a report that the jobs women do are more likely to be low paid. They are also less likely to receive a bonus or progress to the highest position in their organisation.
More than 50,000 women leave their jobs early every year after having a baby or becoming pregnant, the report says. Men are being encouraged to get involved in the campaign for pay parity, especially if they have jobs in areas traditionally dominated by women.
A separate report says one in five mothers have been overlooked for a pay rise or a bonus because they have had children.
A survey of 850 mothers by The Start Up Loans Company revealed that more than a third believed they had been overlooked for promotion by spending more time at home than in the office. Two-thirds said they would have a higher paid job if they did not have children.
Another study, by Totaljobs, found that men were twice as likely as women to feel comfortable asking for a pay rise. A study of more than 4,700 employees and 145 employers showed that women typically expect to get paid a salary of £25,468, compared with £32,030 for men.
John Salt, director of Totaljobs, said: “It is disheartening that our research has revealed that, despite efforts, gender pay equality remains a prominent issue. The application and interview process is a fantastic opportunity for both men and women to negotiate a fair benefits package, including a salary that meets their expectations.
“I would urge all female candidates to aim high and feel confident in demanding the same figure as their male counterparts.”
Rebecca Hilsenrath, chief executive of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, said: “After more than 40 years since the enactment of legislation banning sex discrimination at work and in pay, it is shameful that women continue to face barriers that hold them back. We simply cannot ignore the scale of the disadvantages that working women face.
“Girls and women outperform men at every stage in education, but time after time this success is not translated into rewards at work. Women are a vital part of the workforce and any proposals to tackle the gender pay gap must be strong enough to deliver the change everyone wants to see.”
House hunters are returning to the market after the Brexit vote but are struggling to find suitable homes, which means prices are going up in all parts of the country apart from central London, according to surveyors
The number of properties on the market dropped again in October, continuing the trend of the past two years, the latest monthly housing snapshot from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics) shows. Interest from would-be buyers rose for the second month in a row, with a balance of 10% of Rics members reporting more demand.
The survey showed a small fall in new instructions in October. The combination of growing demand and falling supply pushed up house prices further, with 23% more surveyors reporting growth than a decline, up from a net balance of 18% in September.
London remained an exception where prices fell for the eighth month, with 16% more surveyors reporting falling rather than rising prices.
This reflected affordability issues and the slump in luxury home sales in inner London owing to Brexit uncertainty and stamp duty changes, while the outer boroughs were still seeing significant price growth, Rics said. Land Registry data has also suggested that the wealthiest buyers are shunning London, with sales of £10m-plus homes collapsing 86% in the past year.
Simon Rubinsohn, the Rics chief economist, said: “The dire shortage of available housing across the UK is continuing to push prices upwards, regardless of the uncertainty linked to the ongoing discussions surrounding Brexit. We are only weeks away from the autumn statement and it will be interesting to see what measures – if any - the chancellor will put in place to increase housing supply and create a more affordable market.”
As the market recovers after the shock vote to leave the EU in June, agreed sales rose slightly last month, with a balance of 5% of surveyors seeing an increase. All regions of the country are expected to experience a further rise in property transactions in coming months.
Prices are also expected to keep rising, with 18% more surveyors predicting growth in the next three months rather than a decline. Central London is the only exception where prices are forecast to be broadly flat in the near future.
The lack of homes to buy has fuelled demand in the lettings market, where a balance of 29% of surveyors reported a rise. London bucked this trend, with a balance of 15% reporting falling demand. This means rents are likely to fall in the next three months in the capital, in marked contrast with the rest of the country where rental growth expectations picked up, to 34% from 15% in the three months to June.
The booming rental market could outstrip house buying for the first time since the 1930s next year, the UK’s biggest estate agency chain Countrywide has predicted.
The only way is up in these properties from Devon to New York
Tata Steel has been lambasted for considering closing its UK pension scheme before making a £60m payment scheduled for next year.
Stephen Kinnock, the Labour MP for Aberavon, said it would be an “absolute disgrace” if Tata closed the scheme without making the payment and said the Indian company had “moral and social responsibilities”.
The British Steel pension scheme (BSPS) is a major obstacle to a rescue deal for Tata Steel UK, which employs 11,000 people and owns the Port Talbot steelworks, which is in Kinnock’s constituency in south Wales.
The BSPS has liabilities of more than £15bn and 130,000 members, making it one of the biggest retirement schemes in the country.
The future of Tata Steel UK has been in doubt since the Indian company announced in March that it was reviewing the future of the business amid mounting losses and its debts.
Ratan Tata, the interim chairman of Tata, aims to make a final decision about whether to keep Tata Steel UK or sell it off within the next few weeks.
Tata is in talks with the German company ThyssenKrupp about merging their European steel operations, but the UK business is only likely to be included if the pension scheme can be restructured.
Ratan Tata is understood to be keen to keep the UK business, either through a merger with ThyssenKrupp or keeping it wholly owned. However, an overhaul of the pension scheme is considered vital by the Indian company.
Tata was initially in talks with the government about changing UK laws so the annual increase in benefits was pegged at a lower level of inflation, which could have cut billions of pounds from the future liabilities.
The government is considering a consultation on potential changes to the pension scheme, but Tata is understood to have shelved the inflation plan and is considering closing the scheme as part of a different restructuring, the full details of which are unknown.
Tata is due to make the £60m payment into the pension scheme in March after an agreement with trustees to financially support it. A further payment is due in 2018.
Kinnock said he hoped Tata would “stand by their obligations to pensioners and steelworkers. It is an absolute disgrace if these reports are true. Tata have not only legal, but also moral and social responsibilities to the members of the BSPS and the workforce across the UK.
“To seek to escape those responsibilities and avoid their obligations, by exploiting a technicality, is not only a slap in the face to the workers and pensioners who have sought to work with the company to find a resolution, but it should trouble us all.”
In response, Tata said it remained in discussions about the future of the pension scheme.
A Tata Steel spokesman said: “Tata Steel UK continues to be in active dialogue and engagement with all relevant stakeholders to develop options to support a sustainable future for the business and find a solution to address the costs, risks and volatilities of the BSPS and the risks this brings to the future of the Tata Steel UK business. These discussions are currently ongoing with stakeholders as it is important to continue to explore viable alternatives for the BSPS.
“The UK’s Department for Work and Pensions launched a public consultation in May 2016 to explore certain alternate options for the BSPS. The company awaits the outcome of that consultation but in the meantime is actively exploring alternative courses of action.
“Tata Steel is committed to working with the pension scheme trustee, the trade unions and relevant regulatory and government bodies to achieve a fair outcome for the British Steel pension scheme and its members against the backdrop of the difficult business conditions and the structural challenges the steel industry is currently facing.”
Toy sales in the UK are forecast to soar to a record high of more than £3.3bn this year, with Christmas gifts accounting for a third, according to industry figures.
An estimated £1.1bn will be spent on gifts for the festive season – with an average of £105 spent on younger children – according to an analysis for the UK’s leading toy and games retailers. A record 400m toys are forecast to be sold in 2016.
Despite the ongoing squeeze on household incomes and economic uncertainty following the Brexit vote, the Toy Retailers’ Association said families had the choice of a wide range of affordable toys which provided fun for family members of all ages.
Among the 12 toys it has tipped to be best-sellers this Christmas is the recently launched Hatchimals – interactive creatures that eventually “hatch” from an egg in response to a child’s touch – and which are already selling out in some parts of the UK.
The £59.99 toy, suitable for those five and over, is already in short supply in some retailers after being on sale for just a month. Manufacturer Spin Master said it had ramped up production and was overseeing a phased supply into stores into next year to ensure consumers were not disappointed.
“Analysis of the top-selling toys this year shows the sheer variety of concepts driving the sector – from low-priced collectables to entertainment-driven hot toys,” said Frederique Tutt, a toy industry analyst for the NPD Group.
Toy sales grew by 5% from January to September compared with the same period last year, she said, adding that while post-Brexit price increases of up to 10% were possible, consumers would not be hit in the pocket until after Christmas 2017.
Linzi Walker, the chief toy buyer for Argos, said the retailer was working closely with its suppliers across the world to try to avoid price rises at this stage.
The TRA’s DreamToys list is drawn up by a panel of leading toy retailers in the UK including Argos, Boots, Selfridges, Smyths Toys, the Entertainer, TK Maxx and Toys R Us.
DreamToys’ selection committee chairman, Gary Grant, said: “The one unifying thing that I see in the DreamToys selection this year is a sense of real family fun at the heart of many of the toys represented.”
Also on the Dream Toys list is the guaranteed “no mess” Snuggles My Dream Puppy and the Shopkins Chef Club Hot Spot Kitchen.
The £20 SelfieMic – an adjustable selfie stick with karaoke microphone that allows users to create their own music videos – and the family games Speak Out and Silly Sausage, also feature in the list of likely top-sellers.
Last year’s surprise Christmas hit, Pie Face, has been the top-selling game in the UK to mid-October and is joined this festive season by a version designed for two people.
A “contactless” version of Monopoly minus the wodges of cash, Monopoly Ultimate Banking Game, is also tipped to be popular for players aged eight and upwards.
From selfie karaoke to talking sausages, we bring you toy retailers’ predictions for this year’s festive hits from the DreamToys list
Building my first high-rise tower wasn’t too difficult. I threw up some studio apartments, hooked them up with power and phone lines, arranged for a rubbish collection, and welcomed my first tenants. I packed the people in, stacked the units, and the profits soon began to pile up nicely.
It’s fun being a virtual landlord. I’ve been playing Project Highrise, a PC and Mac real estate management simulation, since the game’s release in September. It gives cash-strapped renters like me a chance to indulge the wild fantasy of owning property. It also offers members of Generation Rent some insight into how real-world landlords and larger developers actually do business.
Despite its cutesy appearance, the game is surprisingly detailed and utterly unsentimental. You begin the game by managing the costs of building infrastructure, and trying to avoid taking on too much bank debt before your tenants can provide a steady revenue stream. Before too long, you’re hiring consultants to lobby city hall for a metro station and wondering whether “prestige” artwork in the hallway might attract higher-paying residents.
In becoming a digital Donald Trump, I learned some interesting, if slightly depressing lessons. For one thing, it’s costly to lose tenants. You don’t want a day to go by without any rent; and you don’t want to have to reach into your pocket to refurbish an empty flat to make it rentable again. So it’s best to keep all current tenants happy, if you can. But fixing up occupied flats that have turned grimy is also expensive, so it’s worth trying to hold out as long as possible without doing repairs.
I also learned how easy it is to dehumanise your tenants. At first, each new tower resident was an intriguing little person I cared about. I customised their names so I could remember their characteristics. Phyllis, who didn’t seem to go out much, became “Phyllis the Quiet One”. Mildred, who always complained about the smell of the rubbish bins on her floor, became “Smell-sensitive Mildred”. Dave was simply “Tank Top Dave”.
But before too long, after filling six or seven floors, I forgot about them as individuals. They were simply rent payers; inhabitants of my units. And if they weren’t happy about something, they became a profit-draining pain.
“We did a lot of research about how real-world things function,” says Matthew Viglione, designer of Project Highrise, which is made by Chicago-based SomaSim. “We talked to building developers and owners in Chicago about how much they plan for, how much they react, how needy certain tenants are, and how much you want residential [tenants] versus commercial [tenants]. We did walking tours of various skyscrapers, and said, ‘Yes, we want that element in the game.’”
Project Highrise runs a series of urban development challenges in which the player is put in charge of buildings in crisis, based loosely on repurposed and rejuvenated downtown Chicago skyscrapers like the Marquette Building.
I tried one challenge called “neighbourhood revitalisation”, which tests your ability to revive a particularly run-down building and restore it to profit-making glory. Shamefully, I found it cost effective to evict low paying cafes and cheap liquor stores and bring in some higher paying “creatives” – graphic design studios, architectural practices and talent agencies. Perhaps I was only following the gentrification model I’ve absorbed from real-life London.
Project Highrise’s programmer, Robert Zubek, says the game was not based on any one model of change – and it is possible to adopt a number of different strategies to find reliable, long-term profit.
“If you imagine a game where your tower is grimy and run down, you don’t actually have to fix it,” Zubek explains. “You can just lower the rent just enough for people to be less unhappy, so that they don’t move out. So you can play this ‘slumlord’ kind of game. It is still dehumanising, because ultimately you’re having to treat your tenants as financial resources.”
In this respect, the game reflects life all too well. If continually watching the bottom line seems a little grim, there is at least the consolation of playing with the form of your fantasy tower. Would-be architects can tinker with the shape of construction, although SomaSim’s designers admit to being strongly influenced by the simple, clean modernism of Chicago’s Mies van der Rohe for the game’s basic structural elements.
“It’s a style that travels well,” explains Viglione. “And the interior design, the colour palette and furniture were borrowed from the 1960s. There’s something very simple, international and appealing about it. I think the optimism of that era was fantastic.”
Intriguingly, some of SomaSim’s early ideas were too awkward to incorporate into the finished game. One concept the team considered, before it was finally deemed too complex, was offering virtual tenants the chance to sign up to long-term tenancy contracts.
“We did consider introducing leases where residents could agree to be locked into long-term leases,” says Zubek. “But we had a hard time making that easy for the player to understand – it just made it harder to enjoy the game. You want to give the player a lot of power so they have the agency to do things.”
After six weeks of playing Project Highrise, squeezing tiny tenants living in my laptop tower, I found myself envisioning a different kind of video game: a fantasy world which flipped everything on its head, and put the tenant in control.
In this alternative game (Project Housing Crisis?) wealthy property magnates would be able to vicariously experience the life of an impoverished renter, attempting to dodge rent hikes and the threat of eviction while saving up for a deposit. You never know, it might even make our cities kinder, more human places.
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook and join the discussion
Less well-off couples trying to separate through divorce proceedings are facing a “perfect storm” of court closures, legal aid cuts and bureaucratic breakdown, says Nigel Shepherd, the newly appointed head of the family law organisation Resolution, a 6,500-strong association which represents solicitors, barristers and other professionals involved in family law.
Shepherd, 60, who has taken up the post for the second time in his career, has already written to the new justice secretary, Liz Truss, pressing her department to carry out a review of the impact of the withdrawal of legal aid in most family cases.
Unless individuals can demonstrate they are victims of domestic violence, courtroom representation is no longer available under the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012. Advice “deserts”, areas where there are few agencies or solicitors able to give help, have begun to emerge. For poorer individuals who cannot afford a solicitor, the withdrawal of legal aid for family courts has caused a surge in litigants in person, whose claims, if pursued, take far longer to resolve, according to Shepherd. As many as 80% of all family law cases may now involve one party who is unrepresented.
“London has a real problem if you want a high court hearing [for divorce cases],” Shepherd says. “You may have to wait nine months to a year.” This means that custody battles are more protracted. Online divorce, being developed by the judiciary, is not yet available.
Local authority funding cuts have also made it harder to obtain reports from social workers, Shepherd says, pointing to the warning last month by Sir James Munby, who heads the family division, that family courts are facing a “clear and imminent crisis” because of the increase in childcare cases.
The Ministry of Justice’s austerity programme of court closures has placed further strains on access to justice. “There’s pressure from court closures; 86 in the latest slice. It means people have to travel a lot further – difficult for those who use public transport,” says Shepherd. Clients from parts of rural Cambridgeshire, who have to travel to Peterborough family court, for example, already have a two-hour journey each way involving several buses and a train, according to Resolution.
And the administration of family cases is also feeling the strain. Regional legal centres such as Bury St Edmunds, which is supposed to coordinate family cases across the south-east, are difficult to reach by phone, according to Shepherd. “One of my friends spent six hours trying to get through. It’s very frustrating. Service in the south is poor.”
Shepherd, who has worked as a family solicitor since 1981 and first chaired Resolution in the early 1990s, believes two changes would greatly improve outcomes for poorer households going through family breakdown: no-fault divorce and greater legal rights for cohabiting couples.
“Our key campaign is no-fault divorce,” he says.
There are around 110,000 divorces a year in England and Wales. No-fault divorce might reduce pressure on the courts, says Shepherd, since a lot of his work involves stripping away misconceptions divorcing couples hold, such as the belief that they are entitled to a larger share of assets if they can prove their partner was to blame for the breakdown.If separating partners realised they did not need to allocate blame, he believes, the process could be simplified. Although regulations allowing couples to dissolve unsuccessful marriages by mutual agreement without blame were included in the 1996 Family Law Act, they never came fully into force. In the face of a hostile Daily Mail campaign warning that they would undermine family life, Tony Blair’s Labour government decided not to proceed with changes that would have allowed couples to part after 12 months without having to apportion culpability. The powers were finally repealed by the 2014 Children and Families Act.
But as far as Shepherd is concerned, no-fault divorce is back on the political agenda. In September, the House of Commons Library produced a detailed briefing paper on the arguments surrounding the initiative and last year, Richard Bacon, the Conservative MP for South Norfolk, introduced a private member’s bill on no fault divorce.“None of the evidence suggests that when you change the law you get more divorces – other than a temporary blip when it’s first introduced.” Many countries allow no-fault divorce, including Spain and Scotland. But in England and Wales, unreasonable behaviour and adultery still account for more than two thirds of all divorces, as these are the main legal grounds that allow people to part straight away without waiting two years to get a mutually agreed divorce.
Shepherd believes no-fault divorces should be available after six months by mutual agreement. “There would have to be six months of separation,” Shepherd said. “We don’t want people to be able to wake up and get divorced. We are not anti-marriage, but we are anti-unnecessary conflict.
“At the moment it’s a blame game. [Lawyers] get together to talk about what we are going to put in the divorce petition. I would like to get rid of unreasonable behaviour, adultery and desertion. All other government policy is about trying to take the heat out of the situation.” Resolution’s other main campaign is extending legal rights to cohabiting couples, of which there are now 3.3 million in the UK, more than double the number 20 years ago. A couple can live together for 30 years, bringing up children, but if they are not married there is nothing to protect against hardship if the relationship collapses and only one of the couple, usually the man, owns the house and assets.
“We think [partners] ought to be able to claim [support and assets] after two years of cohabitation, or earlier if they have children,” Shepherd says. “Forty-seven per cent of the population [mistakenly] still believes there’s such a thing as ‘common law marriage’ [to give them rights].
“For some people it’s a complete disaster. It’s particularly hard on women who have given up their career to raise children,” he argues. “Scotland protects cohabitees legally. At the last count in 2013, 57% of MPs believe the law needs to be reformed.” Resolution is convening a debate tomorrow on how to improve cohabitation rights and a meeting in parliament at the end of the month.
Brexit is for many a traumatic divorce from the idea of the European Union. According to Shepherd, it is also fuelling marital breakdown. “We have come across a number of families in this country [who are splitting up] because one of them voted differently in the referendum,” he says.
“I suspect it was unlikely to have been the sole reason [for divorce], but we have heard of cases from a number of our members. It was a really divisive campaign. It pushed some couples [over the edge]. It was the last straw that made them think ‘we are really incompatible’.” Brexit is proving a challenge to the lawyers, too. “We prepare quite a lot of prenuptial agreements under the European system but we can’t say now where we would like issues determined,” Shepherd says. “We don’t know what marriage regulations will exist.”
In the end, much of the acrimony over divorce could be alleviated with greater clarity over financial settlements. Publishing some rough financial guidelines on the amounts of maintenance to be expected might help, he suggests.
“The problem is that the case law is up in the air; judges in southern England are more generous than those in the north when making maintenance awards. We [in London] are a generous jurisdiction for people seeking money. We are still the divorce capital of the world. There’s a battle between high court judges, so one judge may be at one end of the spectrum and one at the other. You can’t say either.”
Education Brentwood school, Brentwood, Essex; Manchester Polytechnic (as it then was), BA, law with German.
Career 2016-present: national head of family law, Mills & Reeve; 2016-18: chair, Resolution; 2008-present: family law specialist, Mills & Reeve; 2006-present: fellow of the International Academy of Family Lawyers (worldwide group of peer-elected family law specialists); 1981-2007: family law specialist in a number of firms; 1995-97 chair, Resolution; 1991: elected to national committee of Resolution and chair of what is now the association’s dispute resolution committee; late 1980s: chair, Resolution’s north-west regional group; 1981: qualified as a solicitor.
The only way is up in these properties from Devon to New York
Why skimp on one sinuous staircase when you can have two? These twin curves, each leading to a bedroom, are made for grand entrances. And that’s not it: a third staircase off to the side leads to a third bedroom. It is more glamour than practicality because you have to descend and ascend to get from one bedroom to another and lug the Hoover after you if you’re cleaning. The house has been expensively converted from a barn, with wiring for surround sound and a jacuzzi tub in the main bathroom. Asking price: £595,000. Mullucks Wells , 01279 755400
I was involved in a minor shunt while driving more than two years ago. It was my fault so I notified my insurer, NatWest, and was told it would settle with the other driver’s insurer.
Months later, I received a letter informing me a county court judgment (CCJ) had been made against me for an unpaid insurance claim of £10,000. This was the first I had heard about the debt or the court case.
A claims-handling firm contacted by NatWest said it had contested the claim for repairs from the third party. The other driver then filed for the judgment.
So much time has elapsed that the CCJ can no longer be removed from the register. NatWest held its hands up and sent me a £750 goodwill payment. However, thanks to the CCJ, I have been refused credit, an application for a bank account has been turned down, and my business expansion plans have been set back. NatWest considers the case closed. TS, London
The most frightening aspect of this case is the fact that a CCJ can be issued against someone without their knowledge. CCJs are meant to be a last resort for creditors wanting to recover a debt. If a court finds in their favour a charge can be put on the debtor’s home and the judgment remains on their credit file for six years, making it almost impossible to obtain a mortgage or even a phone contract. Defendants are notified of court action via an address supplied by the creditor and if they do not respond within 14 days the judgment is passed. This means that if the address is incorrect or out of date they lose their chance to argue their case.
Last year 740,000 CCJs – 85% of the total – were signed off by courts to recover alleged debts in the absence of the defendants, many of whom, like you, owed nothing to anyone.
NatWest, which took more than two months to respond to me about your saga, says an “avoidable internal misunderstanding” caused the third-party insurer to take the legal route. “Unfortunately, over the course of six months, the third party insurers issued no warning to us that they were considering legal action,” says a spokesperson. “The only communication was the legal summons, issued directly to the policyholder once legal proceedings had begun, which unfortunately was not received.”
Since you only have a year to get a contested CCJ removed from the court register, you have been deprived of the chance to clear your name, but NatWest says it has “worked hard” to get it hidden so it will no longer affect your credit rating. It will consider more compensation if you can prove that your business has been compromised.
If you need help email Anna Tims at your.problems@observer.co.uk or write to Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Include an address and phone number.
Predictions about the future tend to run to the extremes. Some people think that artificial intelligence will liberate us from work, leaving us to a life of leisure, self-driving cars, and Wi-Fi-enabled kettles. Others think robots will steal our jobs, ushering in dystopian levels of unemployment. Like all things, the reality is likely to be something in between. It’s also likely to be strangely familiar.
Technology tends not to wipe away the differences and inequalities in a society. Karl Marx, for instance, was famously wrong in his prediction that the introduction of railways would overcome the caste system in India. Technology is mediated through society. It builds on the inequalities we already have, twisting and transforming them.
Women’s role in society has changed drastically in the last century but men and women still lead unequal economic lives. Women tend to work in different occupations, in different industries, in different ways, and for different (read: smaller) incomes. That economic difference means that technology will affect women in ways that are sometimes better, sometimes worse, but definitely different from the effects on men.
By some estimates, as many as 40% of jobs in Australia today will be done by algorithms or machines within a decade or two. It’s not the case that white-collar jobs will stay and blue-collar will go. Instead, the key question is whether a job’s tasks are routine or not. Reviewing thousands of documents to prepare for a court case? Probably best done by a machine. Talking someone through a difficult health diagnosis? Probably still a job for a person.
Australia’s workforce is highly gender-segregated. Women tend to be concentrated in particular industries or occupations. This doesn’t mean women will either bear the brunt or be exempt from job losses. The breadth of change promised by automation means that both genders face job losses over the coming decades. Some female-dominated roles such as administrative staff or personal secretary may disappear, but then so too may heavily male roles such as machinery operator and some kinds of labourers.
What we can see, though, is that on current trends automation is likely to embed the inequality that comes from having a gender-segregated workforce.
Australia’s gender pay gap in May of this year is a little over 16% (which by the way is basically the same that it was back in May 1995). We know that a large part of this gap comes from female professions being paid less than male equivalents. Automation won’t change that. In this new, digitised world, human skills such as empathy, creativity, or even complicated manual manipulation have special value.
But the risks and opportunities in the new economy may well be distributed between men and women in old, gendered patterns. We are likely to see growing demand for people in the care sector. These jobs, such as nurses or aged care workers, are now largely performed by women and are largely underpaid. At the same time we will also likely see growth in high-paid roles in engineering, science and technology – areas where women are traditionally underrepresented.
Technology isn’t going to erase that gap. If current trends continue we won’t have a pipeline of young women ready and able to take advantage of Stem opportunities. We can hope that automation may force us to rethink the value of caring roles and pay our teachers, nurses and childcare workers more. To achieve that we don’t just need to advance our tech – we need to advance our thinking.
It’s not just about how we work. As machines take over work, a greater share of profits will flow to those who own things rather than those who do things. Take Uber, for example. At the moment the value produced by Uber is split between the company that owns the app and the drivers who do the work. If self-driving cars take over, the value created goes in its entirety those who own the vehicles.
Men are positioned to capture a greater share of those profits because men own more than women. As a consequence of the gender pay gap, men have more savings, more investments and more superannuation. Twentieth-century feminism has emphasised the importance of economic independence for women and in the postwar period women have entered the workforce in ever greater numbers to achieve this. In a digitised world, will this continue to be a viable strategy for economic equality?
There are very real questions about what our relationships and families will look like if we cement the role of men and women as economic unequals. We have had decades of (admittedly slow and faltering) progress towards more equal and respectful home lives. Can we expect that to continue if the opportunities for women outside the home are fewer, and less well paid?
On the other side of the ledger, there is little evidence that the explosion of household technology does much to change the burden or division of household labour. Just as one task is made easier by a gadget, another new expectation or demand seems to emerge.
So what are we to do? First we need to abandon techtopian hopes that inequality will melt in the face of scientific advances. This is true not just of gender, but of race, class, or any other driver of inequality. We will erase inequality in the future in the same way we did in the past – through the hard work of concerted action to remove structural barriers.
For women, this means continuing with the program we already have – valuing feminised labour, removing the barriers to women fully participating in work, and ensuring government levers such as superannuation and taxation reduce rather than intensify the wealth gap. It also means that government needs to consider the ways in which new threats and opportunities impact men and women differently. We need to be alive to the role of gender.
That’s not a task for the future – it’s a task that starts now. Take the gig economy, for example. Digitisation has made it easier and cheaper to find people to do tasks. What we do with that tech is up to us. Some companies have used it to develop business models in which workers are paid less, have few workplace protections, and no guaranteed hours. (It’s worth noting that women are concentrated in the low-paid jobs which are particularly vulnerable to this business model.) We don’t have to accept this. There are other ways to deploy this same technology. We can encourage models that don’t leave all the risk and uncertainty with the worker.
When I say ‘we’, I mean our government, but I also mean each of us as voters, citizens and consumers. We can all question the ways in which people seek to use technology and ask whether they are making us a more or less fair society. After all, technology doesn’t make the future – we do.
Theresa May has called for motorists to be shamed out of using mobile phones while driving, after a spate of high-profile accidents.
The prime minister called for an urgent cultural shift that would make using a phone on the road a taboo, like drink-driving, saying that “a moment’s distraction can wreck the lives of others forever”.
The government was planning to toughen up penalties, she said.
“Ultimately, though, we need to work with the public to raise awareness of the dangers of using a mobile phone when driving. Just as we have made it socially unacceptable to drink and drive, so we need to do the same with using a mobile phone while driving.
“We need people to realise the tragedy they can inflict in a fleeting moment and stop people using a mobile when their eyes and mind should be on the road and their hands on the wheel.”
