There is a powerful new club in the north-west of England but its most bankable players are probably unfamiliar, despite raking in hundreds of millions of pounds a year from fans.
Meet Boohoo, PrettyLittleThing and Missguided, the Manchester-based online companies threatening to take over fashion retailing with inexpensive, brash clothes that are more likely to have been inspired by a reality TV star’s clubbing outfit than the catwalk.
Last week, Boohoo bought a controlling stake in PrettyLittleThing, the startup founded by the sons of Boohoo’s co-founder, Mahmud Kamani. With PrettyLittleThing valued at only £5m thanks to an option clause dating back to Boohoo’s flotation prospectus in 2014, the deal was as much of a bargain for shareholders as the £8 clingy dresses its shoppers love.
“The deal provides Boohoo with a complementary brand at a really attractive valuation,” says Phil Adams, chief executive of GCA Altium, who advised Boohoo. The purchase gives Boohoo shareholders – who have seen the value of their holdings quadruple this year – a slice of one of the fastest-growing young fashion brands in the UK at the moment.
The driving force behind PrettyLittleThing is 28-year-old Umar Kamani, who started the brand with his brothers in 2012. Sales surged 400% to £17m in the 12 months to end of February 2016 as its target market of teenagers and twentysomethings snapped up edgy fashions created with so-called “influencers” like Lionel Richie’s 18-year-old model daughter, Sofia. Sales are expected to ratchet up by another 150% this year.
Online fashion aimed at young women is currently the sweet spot in a tough fashion market, because low prices keep wardrobe updates within reach of even the tightest budgets.
“The teenage wallet has its limitations,” explains Boohoo’s joint chief executive, Carol Kane. “We don’t have a high returns rate: our shoppers don’t want to tie up their money. If they are spending £20 on a dress they won’t spend £40 ordering two sizes. They don’t have that kind of money. It is quite different to the middle market.”
Kane adds that key to PrettyLittleThing’s success is the age of the founders: “Umar is from the same generation as his customers.” That means he knows his peers are glued permanently to their phones, scrolling through social networks. They want to be able to flick through a digital wardrobe packed with thousands of bodycon dresses, jumpsuits and thigh-high boots while they are at the bus stop, thinking about what they are going to wear on their next night out.
She describes the Boohoo brand, which has a broader clothing offering, as “more inclusive” than its younger, sister brand. “The Pretty Little Thing shopper is sassy, glamorous and body confident,” she says. “I would definitely say she is confident.”
While this wave of digital fashion businesses, which includes rivals such as Missguided and Public Desire, look like overnight success stories, they have generations of experience to draw on as the founders are typically scions of successful clothing importers based in the region. Mahmud Kamani’s father Abdullah, who escaped war-torn Kenya in the 60s to start a new life in England, started out selling handbags on a market stall but went on to become a successful high street clothing supplier. The family reaped £240m from the IPO in 2014.
“Online fashion retailers don’t have the legacy of stores to worry about,” says Boohoo chairman Peter Williams. “If they get traction with customers, as both Boohoo and Pretty Little Thing has done, they can grow very quickly.”
“Being able to source great product at a sensible price has been one of Boohoo’s great strengths,” he adds. “Celebrity trends can be interpreted very quickly and the stock turns [over] at a fantastic rate ... it’s a very dynamic model.”
Missguided is another Manchester-based brand enjoying breakneck growth. In the year to March, its chief executive, Nitin Passi, says sales increased by a third to £117m, and that the business is currently enjoying growth of more than 60%. Profits were down, though, as it invested in a new headquarters in Salford Quays and warehousing, and went on a hiring spree, recruiting 336 head office staff in the last 18 months.
“This enables us to scale the business,” explains Passi. “We are going after growth in the UK and internationally.”
Passi, whose father is a successful clothing supplier, started the site in 2009 when he was in his mid-20s. Rather than describe its model as “fast fashion”, he prefers “rapid fashion”, as 300 lines land on the site every week and it has the ability to get a new design on sale within 10 days. Missguided has recently opened its first store in London with plans to open more around the country in 2017.
He insists the business is not built on his family connections, as their expertise is in dressing a different demographic. “I borrowed £50,000 from my dad in 2009 and paid him back in 2010,” he says. Missguided is based in Manchester mainly because Passi’s uncle offered him free office space at the back of one of his factories to get started.
Missguided has sought to differentiate itself from rivals with edgy branding that includes the promise to “create killer garms for the dreamers, believers and night lovers”.
“A lot of retailers were playing it quite safe so we decided to be a bit more real in the way we spoke to our customers,” says Passi. The 34-year-old entrepreneur agrees competition is hotting up but adds: “In the zero to £20m [sales bracket] there are a lot of players, but above £50m not so many. We focus on the customer, not the competition.”
Manchester’s fashion stars are burning bright at the moment but Williams adds a cautionary note: “The internet means if a brand has momentum it can grow very quickly. Obviously you don’t hear about the ones that don’t make it.”
You’ll have seen the billboards. Usually on the tube or side of a bus, usually featuring diverse models wearing something revealing, sheer and sparkly, and usually with the price writ large on the poster. You might not have bought anything from Boohoo or Missguided or Pretty Little Thing, but that’s because they’re not for you. These brands are for Generation Z. Cheap, disposable, ethically dubious and arbitrarily named, this new wave of online-only retailers mark a shift in how we’re shopping and what we’re buying, and prove that superfast fashion is only getting faster.
Their success comes down a series of tactics. The Missguided site uses terms like “sick” and “fire” alongside expletives and puns that speak to a very specific Snapchatting age-group. It also features Amina Blue, fashion’s current It model (she’s 5’1”, mixed race, and has appeared on the Kanye West’s Yeezy catwalk). Boohoo, meanwhile, has Sofia Richie (daughter of Lionel, famous for being photographed with Justin Bieber) as its campaign star. Both models speak to post-Instagram girls.
Is this merely a triumph of marketing over clothes? Not likely. Shopping has morphed from a high-street industry based on accessibility and affordability to an increasingly online model which encourages risk and whim. These clothes are so cheap you can afford to risk buying them without trying them.
Ever-increasing prices at Topshop have created a gap in the market for cheaper newcomers. This used to be Asos, and arguably still is, but the online retailer that is the largest in the UK has also inspired smaller, cheaper, younger versions in a similar mould. What they do is different to, say, Topshop or Zara, because the clothes are geared towards millennials and Generation Z, and also because they’re less catwalk-led and more inspired by the red carpet.
If we’re buying online it’s because we’re time-poor and we want a quick solution, whether it’s a last-minute party or something deeper and psychological, and these brands fill that hole.
So if there’s no term for the opposite of “investment purchase”, we need to come up with one, because these brands are taking over.
Morwenna Ferrier
What should I wear to my boss’s Christmas party tomorrow night?
Zzzzzip! Record scratch! Sorry to interrupt, folks: normal service will be resumed next week, but this week we celebrate the festive season by going through the best and worst fashion moments of the year. Honestly, it’s what Jesus wanted us to do. He said so, right after he ticked off John the Baptist for his hopelessly passé robe. “Bias cut is soooo BC, John,” he said, as the two of them strolled along the river Jordan. Maybe. I might be less clear on my New Testament than my Vogue.
Let’s start with the downers. Well, it was a strange year. Breasts, for a start, we consigned to the bin. Vogue decreed that cleavage was “over”, and the adoring shots of Elizabeth Debicki’s frequently bra-strap-free back in The Night Manager seemed to confirm this. Rather sweetly, Vogue tried to pretend that theirs was a feminist declaration: “The tits will not be out for the lads. Nor anyone else, for that matter.” How marvellous! No longer will women suffer the tyranny of Eva Herzigova because a whole new body shape will be celebrated. Hurrah for the inclusivity of fashion! Go feminist fashion! Bog off, boobs!
Wait, what’s that noise? I think it might be a giant “EXCEPT” coming down the pipeline. EXCEPT perhaps it is because Vogue lives in an airless world populated only by the underfed and underweight but it seemed, rather sweetly, to have forgotten that not all women need Wonderbras to manage more than a C-cup. Breasts are not, in fact, just some novelty accessory we’ve been dabbling in, like Carrie necklaces or turbans. Going unsupported is not an option for some of us, at least not without giving ourselves two black eyes. So what to do for us, the unlucky few left with unfashionable breasts that can’t simply be slammed away in a drawer? One broadsheet had the answer: “How to dress when you hate your breasts,” read its headline. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is I believe what’s known as coming full circle.
We also hit peak athleisure, with the arrival of Chloé’s £1,000 tracksuit, a joke straight out of Nathan Barley. There was also peak squad, with various female celebrities clamouring on social media to show off their popularity, holidays and fat-free bodies, from Taylor Swift’s overly Instagrammed 4 July party to Cara Delevingne’s hyperbolically Instagrammed Maldives holiday. Confusingly, we also hit peak peak, so it is of utmost importance that someone come up with the 2017 word for something being over (“basic” is definitely over, as, incidentally, is over).
All right, quit your complaining already, woman! What has been good this year? Glad you ask, I reply to myself. Well, by some measure, my favourite fashion(ish) news story of the year was the undoubtedly totally true one about Kate Moss dumping her boyfriend, the great great grandson of Otto von Bismarck, after he switched off the Wi-Fi in Moss’s home during an argument, meaning her teenage daughter couldn’t use Snapchat and Instagram. You can imagine how that went down with a 14-year-old. Try to find one element in that story that doesn’t bring you some modicum of amusement. I know! You literally can’t! Anyway, young Von Bismarck and Moss are back together so not only is this story hilarious, it also has a happy ending. Whether Moss’s daughter feels the return of the Wi-Fi killer is a happy ending, however, is as yet unknown.
Otherwise, the year was really about two labels – Vetements and Gucci. My much-beloved colleague Jess Cartner-Morley wrote about Vetements’ year last week, so indulge me instead in my Gucci obsession. Put it this way: there are two kinds of fashion fans: the cool ones, and the ones who get distracted with funny things such as embroidered leopards and purple shoes. If you are cool, you like Vetements, and if you are more in the latter camp then you are a Gucci person and God bless you and Gucci’s designer, Alessandro Michele, for it. Fashion hasn’t been this fun since Marc Jacobs used to be fun.
The return of the 90s has been quite amusing-slash-traumatic for those of us who remember the 90s very, very clearly. There’s something about seeing a teenager in a slip dress and jumper to make you muse on your youth. And there’s nothing like realising said teenager wasn’t even alive in the 90s to make you realise how long ago the 90s were.
Finally, I’d like to end this retrospective column by bidding a sad farewell to a fashion item I very much hoped would be a part of all of our lives for the next four to eight years. I speak, of course, of Hillary Clinton’s pantsuits. Remember them? One in every colour! So cheering, so dependable. Never mind your politics (although you’re reading the Guardian, so who are we kidding here?), wouldn’t you rather be seeing those pantsuits on the news than that orange face and tonsorial monstrosity? My heart hurts just thinking about those pantsuits, to be honest. So forget about those Hadid sisters: 2016 was about the pantsuit. But not 2017, alas.
Prada, one of the world’s most expensive fashion brands, is making little effort to show that its goods are free of forced labour, according to a new report.
An assessment (pdf) of the quality and transparency of efforts by 20 major apparel companies to safeguard against forced labour from their supply chains, undertaken by KnowTheChain, an accountability initiative, gave Prada a score of nine out of 100.
The Italian luxury brand, which charges hundreds of pounds for its bags and clothing, was one of three companies that scored less than 25 out of 100. The other two were China’s top shoe firm, Belle International Holdings, and Shenzhou International Group Holdings, another Chinese company.
Companies were ranked by KnowTheChain on a range of indicators including auditing processes, worker recruitment and labour rights, using information provided by the brands and data available on public platforms.
Other luxury brands also returned modest scores, including Ralph Lauren and Hugo Boss, with 45 and 46 out of 100 respectively. According to KnowTheChain, companies scoring more than 46 are considered to have taken “initial steps” to show awareness and commitment to addressing human trafficking and forced labour in their supply chains.
Some companies that fared badly in the study did so because they failed to provide information about efforts they may be making to safeguard against forced labour.
“It would be hard to fathom a company taking steps to address slavery in its supply chains and then failing or refusing to disclose it publicly,” said Kilian Moote, project director of KnowTheChain. “I think what we can deduce from the rankings is that some companies have a long way to go before they are adequately addressing the risk of the worst forms of labour abuses in the makings of their products.”
Hugo Boss acknowledged that it had supplied KnowTheChain with information but said that, with dialogue ongoing, it preferred not to offer a statement at the present time.
High-street companies scored far more highly in the study than luxury brands. Adidas (81), Gap (77) and H&M (69), all of which have robust systems to check their supply chains for slavery, were among those that received the highest ratings.
All companies fared badly on worker recruitment and rights, with many brands failing to put any practices in place for workers to air grievances or form unions.
The International Labour Organisation considers the apparel industry to be at high risk of forced labour and other forms of slavery. There are an estimated 75 million people working in the global garment sector, three-quarters of whom are women.
Goods produced in exploitative conditions include cotton. The US State Department has estimated that forced labour exists in nine countries producing 65% of the world’s cotton, including China, India and Uzbekistan.
The high levels of public transparency and reporting of anti-slavery initiatives among high-street brands follow years of damaging exposés into labour abuses connected to such companies
The luxury fashion world has come under less scrutiny than “fast-fashion” high-street brands. Prada, Ralph Lauren and Hugo Boss also received low ratings in this year’s fashion transparency index, which used similar indicators to assess how well brands were doing at ensuring their products remain free of labour abuses.
“Two conclusions can be made from low-scoring brands, like Prada. Either they are taking excellent action in secret, or these high-status brands don’t yet have the safeguards in place to reassure their customers, and appear to be falling behind their competitors,” said Phil Bloomer, executive director of the Business & Human Rights Resource Centre.
“Top-ranking brands like Adidas and Gap have listened to workers and activists in their supply chains. Their scores in this ranking show it is commercially viable and ethically imperative to seek to eliminate modern slavery in supply chains.”
Sliding deadlines for safety improvements following the Rana Plaza disaster demonstrate why the Bangladesh government must act (Bangladeshi workers still in danger despite safety pledges, says report, 21 November).
Rana Plaza made the potentially deadly conditions in garment factories impossible to ignore. Safety improvements promoted by retailers have brought some positive changes but, given the scale of the problem in Bangladesh, these cannot tackle the root of the problem on their own, and they are not exclusive to garment factories – so what about other sectors?
Basic safety measures such as fire escapes should be emphasised (and brands need to invest), but if Bangladesh truly wants to help the women who labour in the factories it must think bigger and longer term to find sustainable solutions. Key to this will be diversifying the economy to create better jobs and strengthen workers’ rights so that women have more job options for a better future, and employers compete to attract workers by offering the best conditions.
Farah Kabir
Country director, ActionAid Bangladesh
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Austin Reed is returning to the high street seven months after the tailoring specialist collapsed into administration with the loss of 1,000 jobs.
The retail chain’s 120 stores closed in June, but new owner Edinburgh Woollen Mill is investing £100m in a relaunch.
Edinburgh Woollen Mill Group bought the brand when it only had a handful of concessions. It plans to open 50 Austin Reed stores by early 2018, including a London flagship. The brand’s website has relaunched and the first new stores are expected to open before the end of this year.
The Country Casuals and Viyella brands, which the group bought along with Austin Reed, will be relaunched in Edinburgh Woollen Mills stores early next year.
Austin Reed’s customers included Winston Churchill and Elizabeth Taylor in its glory days, but the retail chain struggled for several years before going into administration in April.
While the menswear market is growing faster than womenswear, Austin Reed has faced rising competition from Ted Baker, Reiss, Marks & Spencer and a revived Moss Bros.
The planned store openings were announced as Edinburgh Woollen Mill, which is privately owned by the Cumbria-based entrepreneur Philip Day, reported a 2.4% rise in sales to £576.3m in the year to 27 February. The group, which also owns fashion retailer Peacocks, homeware chain Ponden Mill and golfing brand ProQuip, said pre-tax profits before exceptional items increased by 2.4% to £90.9m. All of the group’s brands had achieved sales growth at established stores, it said.
The company said it planned to open a total of 200 stores by early 2018. In the past year, the group opened 43 stores in the UK and Ireland.
Steve Simpson, the group commercial director of Edinburgh Woollen Mill, said: “By focusing on quality and giving customers exceptional value for money and positive customer service, we have continued to grow despite increased competition.
“With the addition of Austin Reed, which we acquired earlier this year, as well as Country Casuals and Viyella, we aim to continue this organic growth, while always being ready to respond to other opportunities as they arise.”
It would be cruel to describe the front row of a fashion show – where the most senior members of the fashion press are hierarchically seated – as resembling the bar scene in Star Wars, populated by creatures, good and evil, who seem not of this world. But it would be fair to say it’s hard to imagine the majority of them thriving in any other arena than fashion. This has never been the case with Alexandra Shulman, British Vogue’s longest serving editor-in-chief.
I helped to cover fashion shows for the Guardian for a decade and, among her peacock-like colleagues, it was Shulman, as self-contained as a French hen, who intrigued me the most. While she is certainly in the fashion world, she never looks entirely of it, and I always found it easy to imagine her doing something entirely different: writing novels, say, out of her home in north London – which, in fact, she has since done (her second novel was published last year).
The template for a fashion magazine editor has been carved by Shulman’s American counterpart, Anna Wintour, the notoriously fearsome editor of US Vogue. But Shulman has eschewed the kind of celebrity Wintour and other Vogue editors have embraced, and largely ignored the exhausting beauty regimes that are generally seen as part of the job (“I can only stick so far to ‘Il faut souffrir pour être belle’. The less souffrir going on the better, I feel,” she writes in this book.)
But the differences are deeper than mere aesthetics. With fashion journalists, the divide is generally between those who think of themselves as part of the fashion industry and those who think of themselves as journalists. Shulman, despite being at the centre of the fashion world for three decades, has always struck me as being in the latter camp, perhaps because she is the daughter of journalists (her mother is the features writer Drusilla Beyfus and her late father, Milton Shulman, was the Evening Standard’s theatre critic).
Her articles are often far more frank than the cliche of the crushingly controlled fashion editor would lead one to expect. When she interviewed Kate Moss in 2007, she was pleasingly blunt about the model’s, shall we say, changeable nature (“[Moss] makes me feel as welcome as a case of leprosy,” she wrote). When she turned 50, she marked the occasion by writing about how her sense of style has changed over the years – a classic Vogue subject, you might think, although in Shulman’s hands it turned into a reminiscence of how she’s “always had a pretty dodgy figure” and how little interest she has in fashion in her personal wardrobe.
But this is not to suggest that Shulman is any less scary than the more typical fashion editor. I have written for both her and Wintour and, in terms of the fear factor, I’d put them at pretty much level pegging. Whereas Wintour’s froideur verges on the self-parodic, Shulman’s terseness is less easy to dismiss, because she seems more from the realm of normality. I’ve wondered if this was a protective shield she adopted as a high-powered woman working in an industry full of people constantly asking for favours, or simply what she was like. So I was curious to read her somewhat confusingly titled book, Inside Vogue: A Diary of My 100th Year (it is, of course, not Shulman’s 100th year but that of British Vogue). She is a candid writer and I was intrigued to see whether she would apply such candour to herself.
The answer is: yes, she does, as much as she can. This book, structured as a diary, could have just been a bit of easy puffery for Vogue, with Shulman crowing about the magazine’s centenary and its triumphs over the past year (photographing the Duchess of Cambridge, photographing Kate Moss – again!). And there is a fair bit of that. But Shulman has also produced a funny and surprisingly pacy read. She is a wry, subtle writer, and as I was reading it in the evenings I was – and here’s a sentence I never thought I’d write – genuinely looking forward to getting into bed with Shulman every night.
Her anecdotes are all the more amusing for her light touch, especially the ones about celebrities she encounters, all of whom adhere to their own cliche: Charles Saatchi is just as tedious and weird as you’d expect; Naomi Campbell is a high-maintenance nightmare. She is even more cutting about the newspaper columnists who use Vogue as a punchbag without acknowledging that their own publications are just as bad at reducing women to their physical appearance (the Daily Mail’s Liz Jones and Sarah Vine get some especially well-earned jabs). About designers and fashion brands, Shulman is blandly polite, but there’s only so much candour a Vogue editor can afford without scaring the advertisers.
Shulman is most amusing when she writes about herself. She is generally “bad-tempered”, “stressed” and “anxious” – often about work, but also her boiler and Brent Council’s recycling programme (“a system of unbelievable complexity”), two subjects you can’t really imagine Wintour writing about. So next time Shulman barks terrifyingly down the phone at me, I’ll console myself that this has as much to do with north London’s waste disposal processes as it does with my own shortcomings.
Amid the parties with Eddie Redmayne and Kim Kardashian, she interweaves glimpses of the sacrifices she has made to get as far as she has, particularly regarding her son, Sam, and the “wonderful nannies” who looked after him during fashion weeks while Shulman was “crying in the car on the way to the airport”. She hesitates to describe herself as a feminist, preferring instead to say she just gets on with things, and there is something equally old school about the way she writes about Sam and her clearly adored long‑term partner, the journalist David Jenkins. Rarely does she overtly express her love, preferring instead to repeat their frequent jokes at her expense.
She admits that this diary is essentially an Instagram version of her life – “everything we put out about ourselves is edited” – and certain notable subjects are omitted. Most obviously, she never nails why models are so thin, instead merely expressing increasing irritation at being asked about it all the time. But to go into that would require more criticism of fashion designers than even she can allow herself. In the main, this diary has the smack of clear-eyed honesty from a sensible, self-aware woman who works in, and loves, a blithely senseless world.
• Inside Vogue is published by Fig Treet. To order a copy for £13.93 (RRP£16.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
Caitlin Robbins always struggled to find clothes for her dad that didn’t make him look and feel frumpy. As someone with ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease – which impacts people’s ability to walk, talk, and ultimately, to breathe – her dad wanted comfortable and tailored options. But most of the clothes she could find that didn’t restrict his movement, such as pants with an elastic waist and pullover tops, only made him look awful.
“My father was always particular about fashion; he wanted to look nice and dignified,” says Robbins, a fashion design student. “I wanted to design him outfits to be visually different, functional but still stylish.”
Robbins’s experience points to a seemingly untapped opportunity for apparel makers to serve people with disabilities. One in five American adults, or 53.3 million people, report having disabilities, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trouble with mobility, cognition and living independently are the three most common types of disabilities.
Finding well-fitting clothes isn’t just about looking good. Research shows that a lack of functional and tailored clothes can make people with disabilities feel excluded during job search or at social events.
So far, the market is mostly served by small companies such as Buck and Buck in Seattle and Silverts, which designs clothes for customers with rheumatoid arthritis, recovering from strokes or in wheelchairs. Nike has also dabbled in this market with a line of sneakers, after getting a request from a 16-year-old boy with cerebral palsy. The shoes use a wraparound zipper rather than shoelaces, and they also come with a larger opening to make it easy to get in and out of. After an online, limited release last fall, Nike has since launched new basketball and running shoes with the same design.
Per consumer request, Land’s End has offered modified swimsuit designs for women with a mastectomy since 1995. The modification includes a raised neckline and armhole of a conventional swimsuit to cover scar tissue or sensitive skin due to radiation. The bra contains a prosthesis pocket and no underwire. Land’s End designers personally meet with breast cancer survivors to help guide the design, according to Michele Casper, vice president public relations at the company.
And, for a while, J Crew also used to stock a green walking cane for those needing additional support.
While the market for this type of specialty clothes is small and difficult to quantify, it’s attracting growing interest, especially in design schools. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology launched Open Style Lab in 2014 to bring together students in design, engineering and occupational therapy to create clothes for people with disabilities. Researchers at MIT’s International Design Center have created fashions to include fewer sensory triggers such as fraying, rough zippers and scratchy tags for children and adults with autism because of their sensitivity to certain textures and colors.
Outside of the US, designers from Brazil to Hong Kong have made it their mission to serve this niche market. Students like Sophie Neff at Nottingham Trent University in the UK have created a knitwear collection for people in wheelchairs. Neff’s designs include putting pockets on thighs rather than the back of the pants for easier access and tight fitting cuffs to prevent the sleeves from getting caught in the wheels.
While these efforts are encouraging, they fall short in serving the market fully, especially in designing apparel that’s chic and injects self-confidence into the wearer, says Luz Pascal, a professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York City. Pascal was the professor who encouraged Robbins, a student at the institute, to channel her desire to design for her dad into a class project. The goal: creating clothes for people with mobility issues, such as veterans who lost a limb at war or those whose illnesses make it challenging for them to open and close buttons.
Amazing designs resulted. Robbins’s creation included a wool blend jacket and pants for her dad with special details such as extra concealed zippers that offer a wider opening to pull on and off and unzip more easily when using the electric patient lifts for the restroom. Her classmate, Elvira Pena, designed a blanket with special panels – with Braille in some cases – to help children with visual impairment or other disabilities to learn things such as shapes and colors.
The students used real-life models for their project, and working with them was an uplifting experience for everyone. “It’s rewarding to see someone smile because you made them look good,” Pascal says.
But making a business case for creating these specialty designs has proven a challenge. Creating affordable clothes requires producing them at scale, which is not often possible when designs have to be customized to accommodate different types of disabilities. For example, one of Pascal’s students fashioned outfits for a veteran who wanted to avoid fabric draping over her missing arm. “It demands greater skill and creativity to address this segment of the population,” Luz says.
Pena recalls the difficulty of finding a manufacturer and sponsor for her learning blanket, which incorporates six detachable panels containing visual, sensory, tactile and other educational activities. Factory representatives told her the panel design was too complex, and that meant Pena had to simplify her product to make it easier to mass produce. “It will require a company that wants to help and create outside-the-box products for smaller markets,” she says.
Orsola de Castro, founder of the nonprofit Fashion Revolution, which wants to make the fashion industry value people, the environment and share profits more equally, hopes the market for people with disabilities will become as viable as the growing segment that touts the use of sustainable and recycled materials.
“For this niche market to grow, big brands will have to be willing to accept lower profits and see values in providing an important service,” de Castro says. “Many doubted sustainable fashion as viable – and look at the growth we’ve seen.”
In July, Kendall Jenner walked across a glass-topped Trevi Fountain in a blue astrakhan coat with full swing skirt. Fendi had hired private jets to fly guests from the couture shows in Paris straight to Rome, where the label had recently invested €2.5m into the fountain’s 18-month rehab. “It will go down,” wrote Nicole Phelps in Vogue, “as one of the most majestic show venues ever.”
Three months later I’m pushing politely through thousands of American tourists to see the renovated fountain for myself. People lean in with waterproof selfie sticks, queuing for a chance to grin beside the gleaming horses. Visitors throw in almost €3,000 a day. During its renovation, the water was drained from the fountain, but a small basin was set up so tourists wouldn’t miss out on any potential luck.
“The city is part of our creative heritage,” said Silvia Venturini Fendi, third-generation member of the family fashion house. “It’s like an open-air museum where inspiration can come from anywhere.” Fendi is not the only fashion house investing in Italy’s monuments: Bulgari has donated €1.5m to restore the Spanish Steps, and Tod’s, of loafer fame, has put up €25m to repair the Colosseum.
It seems apt that this city, its story so tightly wound with ideas of luxury and taste, can be propped up by fashion brands in a way that, say, London can’t. The idea of Topshop sponsoring a clean-up of Nelson’s Column is almost unthinkable.
It’s a short walk from the Fountain to the Steps, the air warm and thick with the smell of candied peanuts and drains. On the way, I meet a woman briskly directing her young daughter through the dawdling tourists. Marta has lived in Rome all her life, and watched the renovations with some suspicion. “Oh, they’re beautiful,” she says, “but they’re not for us.”
Preserving Italy’s landmarks is crucial for the businesses whose heritages are invested in it. “The Spanish Steps are at the heart of our history,” explained Lucia Silvestri, creative director of Bulgari. ‘‘They’re between Via Sistina, where Sotirio Bulgari opened in 1884, and our flagship in Via dei Condotti.” But what their investment says to locals, believes Marta and her friends, is that the government can’t be relied upon to protect their monuments, let alone improve their transport system or police the streets. “And even when it looks like something is changing to improve Rome” – meaning the place her child goes to school, rather than “Rome”, the place of honeymoons and prosecco – she adds, “the red tape means it takes forever.”
The Spanish Steps were unveiled at the end of September, just before Bulgari’s accessories presentation in Milan. The project involved more than 80 restorers, who repaired the 32,300 sq ft of travertine stone. In the bright autumn light, they gleam grey-white between the tired legs of slumped, lunching tourists, despite Mayor Virginia Raggi having ordered police to stop people “loitering”.
Following their restoration, Paolo Bulgari (chairman of the jewellery house) told La Repubblica that their restorers had removed coffee, wine, chewing gum, “but now I am worried. If we don’t set strict rules, the steps will go back to being used as a camping site for barbarians.” A Plexiglas barrier, he said to waves of controversy, “doesn’t seem like an impossible task”. Perhaps, I wonder, as I climb the steps and look out on the selfie-stick sellers and tourists kissing, it’s the inevitable consequence of luxury brands taking over a city. The introduction of VIP areas.
At the beginning of September, Justine Tabak launched her first eponymous collection. At 52, with a high-flying career as a designer and creative director with Fendi, Laura Ashley, M&S, Jigsaw, LK Bennett and Boden under her belt, Tabak is treading tentatively with her fledgling label. So why did she walk away from a secure, well-paid and coveted job with a high-profile brand, to risk everything in a highly competitive marketplace?
“Having spent the last decade or so working with factories in China, I felt passionately that I wanted to work more closely with British manufacturers and collaborate with creative communities that I could build relationships with,” explains the entrepreneur, whose label features the tagline: “Inspired, fashioned and made in the British Isles.”
Tabak’s start-up works with a small family-run factory in London that also works with established labels such as Victoria Beckham, Roland Mouret and House of Holland. And they are not alone: a number of smaller enterprises, high street brands and international labels are supporting the resurgence of the UK as a fashion manufacturing hub.
As a fashion consultant and a former head of UK production for Roland Mouret, Daliah Simble-Hearn, explains: “I can remember a time when London was full of pockets of manufacturers, and you could spend a day going from factory to factory.
“Two decades on, while we don’t have the density of those factories, the growth potential is there. Communities are evolving again and interestingly with a new skill-set and dynamic that is fulfilling both the luxury and the high street sectors.”
Just this month, English Fine Cottons, a brand new, state-of-the-art spinning business, opened in a reconditioned mill in Tameside, Greater Manchester, in a bid to satisfy demand for luxury goods with a “Made in Britain” stamp, throughout the supply chain.
According to the UK Fashion and Textile Association, this renewed interest in British-made clothing and textiles has seen the number of people employed in the sector grow by 9% in the past five years, with predictions that up to 20,000 more jobs could be created by 2020.
Ellie Lines, a stylist and designer, launched her label in 2014 and uses a production facility in west London to print her bespoke fabrics and make her collection of dresses and separates. She said the choice of factory was intended “to reduce the carbon footprint of fashion” and was “a reaction to the endless brands that launch with their name and ‘London’ on the label, but who manufacture in China, and that drives me insane. The implication is that it is made here, but it’s not. I am proud of my ‘designed and made with love in London’ stance.”
Nicola Woods’s womenswear label, Beautiful Soul – which was launched five years ago and is worn by the likes of Taylor Swift, Livia Firth and Pippa Middleton – is created in and around London, and Woods aims to open her “own manufacturing unit in England and develop international wholesale distribution”.
When former Gap PR Buffy Reid and her father, Columba, a retired knitwear industry executive, launched their label And Daughter three years ago, they wanted to support the mills and factories in Donegal and Scotland by producing a contemporary collection of timeless knitwear staples. Starting with 10 styles, they have evolved to sell 40 pieces via their website, Selfridges and the Conran Shop in London as well as independent stores in Japan, the US and Europe.
Basing their production in Britain enables those behind the brands to meet face-to-face with fabric producers and printers, cutters, machinists and others involved in the process, giving them more control over the entire process.
“There are definitely some very passionate people putting domestic manufacturing on the road again,” says Tabak, who last week was a keynote speaker at the Make it British forum in Leicester, traditionally the heart of the UK’s garment-making industry. “After years of working with mass producers in far-flung places it’s good to be able to meet people in the UK that can make it happen and fly the flag for homegrown talent and industry.”
Kate Hills, a former designer and buyer for M&S and Burberry, founded Make it British six years ago in response to growing demand for UK manufacturing, and helps match designers and brands to production facilities. “I could see prices in the Far East were going up and wanted to do what I could to help the dwindling supply chain we have in the UK, which is still held in high regard around the world,” says Hills.
“Now, I get around 2,000 businesses a month contact me to try to find manufacturers in the UK. Asos, Jigsaw, Topshop and M&S all still make some of their clothes here and, according to HM Customs and Excise there has been a 25% rise in the export of British-made clothing since 2011.”
And, while the pound is weak and the international luxury goods houses struggle to define what high-spending customers want and to retain the prestige of their labels, the renaissance of craftsmanship seems to be helping the boom in British manufacturing.
Mimi Berry launched her leather accessories brand in London’s East End 15 years ago, and now uses three local factories as well as one in Manchester and another in the west country – staffed by a number of former Clarks shoes workers – to produce around 1,400 handbags and satchels each season.
“We have stockists in Paris who sell our bags alongside Louis Vuitton and YSL, and so we are seen on a par with homegrown French brands,” says Berry of her collection, which exports to Japan, France, Switzerland and the US.
“I think it shows a certain intelligence to be confident about the provenance of your wardrobe. The more I work with our British factories and grow to know the families behind them, I knew I was directly helping the people I could see working there. I feel a certain responsibility to support the British workforce and the great heritage we have.”
Britain’s biggest supermarket has warned that dearer food prices triggered by the plunge in the value of the pound will have a lethal impact on poor families worst affected by the expected jump in inflation over the next two years.
Although a price war among the leading food retailers has so far blunted the impact of more expensive imports on grocery bills, Tesco’s UK chief executive, Matt Davies, said rising prices would be “toxic” for consumers if stores found that they had to pass on extra costs.
Official figures from the Office for National Statistics showed the annual inflation rate rising from 0.6% to 1% in September, its highest for almost two years.
The ONS said the cost of living had yet to be much affected by the drop in the value of the pound seen since the EU referendum, but the Bank of England, the International Monetary Fund and City economists believe that inflation will rise above the government’s 2% target in early 2017 and will reach at least 3% by the end of the year.
Researchers at the Institute for Fiscal Studies thinktank, said the decision by the government in the 2015 summer budget to freeze welfare benefits for the whole of the current parliament meant that 11.5 million families would be an additional £2 a week worse off as a result of higher than anticipated inflation.
The IFS said that families already stood to lose £260 a year as a result of George Osborne’s attempt to reduce the UK’s welfare budget, but they would now see their real incomes drop by £360 a year.
Davies said: “Everybody should be very, very clear how damaging food inflation is to the economy, to retail businesses and manufacturing businesses and how lethal it could be for millions of people struggling to live from week to week.”
He spoke out after Tesco became embroiled in a public spat with one of its main suppliers, Unilever, after the maker of brands including Marmite and Persil demanded an across the board 10% rise in prices in light of the devaluation of the pound after the the EU referendum.
The two companies reached an agreement on Friday after it emerged that Tesco was running low on stocks of more than 20 popular Unilever brands because the supplier halted deliveries when the supermarket would not agree to its price demand.
Davies, who was speaking at the Big Debate conference organised by grocery industry body IGD, said it was clear there were inflationary forces in the UK after the Brexit vote but would not say whether they would feed through to price rises on supermarket shelves.
“Our role is to do everything we can do to prevent food inflation which is not good for business and highly toxic for consumers,” said Davies, who joined Tesco from car parts and bicycle retailer Halfords 18 months ago.
City analysts warned that the jump in consumer prices last month marked the first of many increases that would push inflation towards 3% next year.
Some said it was clear weaker sterling was having an effect, especially on the rising cost of imported clothes and footwear, though the ONS played down the overall impact, saying there was no “explicit evidence” it was having a significant impact on consumer prices.
Andrew Sentance, a former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee, which sets interest rates, said: “Higher import prices are feeding through to consumers because of the fall in sterling since the EU referendum.
“This latest rise, however, is just the tip of the inflationary iceberg that is coming our way.”
Inflation hovered around zero during 2015 but has been on a gentle upward trend since the turn of the year. Analysts had been expecting a slightly smaller increase to 0.9% in September, but stressed that further increases were in the pipeline in coming months as last autumn’s falls in energy prices ceased to drag down the annual inflation rate.
The increase in the cost of living was widely forecast after an 18% fall in the value of sterling since the Brexit vote on 23 June.
The ONS said food prices dipped slightly in September and the cost of household goods also fell. But this was more than offset by higher petrol costs relative to last year and clothing, especially womenswear.
Last week, the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, said the Bank could tolerate “a bit” of an overshoot against its 2% inflation target to help economic growth and employment.
Beauty products maker Coty Inc has said it would buy Good Hair Day (ghd), a high-end hairstyling appliances brand, from private equity firm Lion Capital LLP for about £420m ($522m).
Coty, which owns hair colour brands such as Wella and Clairol, became the global No 2 in hair colour and styling products through its $12.5bn acquisition of Procter & Gamble’s perfume, hair care and makeup businesses in October.
The business will become part of Coty’s professional beauty unit, which services salon owners and professionals in hair and nail care, and will be a standalone business led by its current chief executive Anthony Davey and team, Coty said on Monday.
The all-cash deal, to conclude by the end of 2016, is expected to immediately add to Coty’s earnings, the company said.
Coty said last year it would shift its executive team to London, as part of its transformation into a global beauty products maker.
Lion Capital and ghd are being advised by Rothschild & Co and Proskauer Rose LLP. Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom LLP is the legal adviser to Coty.
Hadley, you’ve written on Brexit elsewhere in the paper, but not in your style column. Why is that?
You’re right, Robert! I have stayed away from Brexit in this column because that would mean looking at what it means for the fashion industry, and the answer to that is, well, no one knows. Confusion over Brexit, how strange – don’t see that in any other industry, do you?
On the one hand, thanks to the plummeting pound (boo!) luxury goods are now cheaper for tourists (er, yay?). So, for example, a Louis Vuitton Speedy bag is currently about $200 cheaper in the UK for US visitors – although I wouldn’t exactly count this as sticking it to the elites, as the leave campaign repeatedly claimed voting its way would achieve. But, someone at the back bellows, this will help the British industry as a whole. A surge of tourism! Bringing in money! To the economy! Yay!
All right, little Mikey Gove, try to calm yourself. Maybe go and have an ice cream out the back, but not Ben & Jerry’s because we can’t afford that at the moment. So some tourists might spend more at Harrods, but let’s look at what this means on a more granular level, as proper columnists would put it. Yes, British exports will be cheaper, but only if they don’t rely on imported goods and manufacturing. And, as much as it might pain certain members of the Tory party to hear this, pretty much every British fashion brand relies on those two things. This isn’t because British fashion labels are trying to chisel their own nation’s economy with cheap Chinese knockoffs and eastern European workers, but rather because it is simply not possible for most fashion labels to be entirely manufactured in this country, relying instead on European factories and skilled labour. So the net result of Brexit on all this is that British brands will become much more expensive for British customers, as companies find their costs going up and their workforce depleting. Um, yay sovereignty?
Also, let’s look at British fashion as a whole. Now, what this country’s fashion industry has always lacked in terms in of infrastructure, slickness and big-brand money, it has made up for in creativity. At least, that’s what those who work in it love to tell themselves. OK, we don’t have Dior or Calvin Klein, but look! We have the best fashion schools in the world, where the best students from around the world come to study. And look! We also produce some of the most acclaimed designers who then work at the biggest labels around Europe, such as Phoebe Philo (Chloé, Céline), Stella McCartney (Chloé), Alexander McQueen (Givenchy), John Galliano (Givenchy, Dior, Maison Margiela), etc, etc. Yay, Britain! But how, exactly, will this continue to work if it’s harder for foreign students to come here and European companies have to sort out complex visas when they hire British workers? Oh stop worrying, says the leave camp, relying, perhaps, on British fashion’s much-vaunted creativity to get around these little problems.
Finally, I’d say the ultimate problem is bigger and more amorphous than visas. So much in fashion is about image and association: buy a New York label and you’re buying into the fantasy of Manhattan dynamism and power lunches; an Italian label suggests dolce vita glamour; French labels promise chic. British labels, more than any other country’s, play on such national stereotypes: ideas of heritage (the tweed, the crown), punkish rebellion and, most of all, a kind of gonzo creativity in which Britain has always taken pride. But what image, Britain, do we have now, in our post-Brexit era on the global stage? I’d wager it has a lot less to do with enviable sovereignty and more about a silly little country that cut off its nose to spite everyone’s face. Is that the sort of look people want to buy into?
Look, as even Boris Johnson would almost certainly admit if you caught him in a rare moment of honesty, Brexit has far bigger problems facing it than how it will affect the fashion industry. But all of these issues underline the central question of Brexit, which is: what kind of country do we want to live in? Because, at the risk of tipping into pomposity, fashion encapsulates fantasy and aspirational self-image. So when a country’s fashion industry looks like it will struggle to achieve this, on both a practical and mental level, it’s perhaps time to take a good long look in the mirror again.
What to make of Bob Dylan winning the Nobel?
Sure, Dylan knows how to write a line or ten million. But as singer Tracey Thorn quite rightly tweeted last week, “So much Bob adulation is bound up in the fact that he looked so cool,” which is why, she continued, even more rightly, “Paul Simon loses out, because fewer iconic photos.” Truer words were rarely ever tweeted. Sure, Dylan’s fine, but, I’ll be honest, he’s never written anything that has struck me as purely poetical as, say, The Boy in the Bubble, The Boxer or even just the opening lines of Graceland. Also, Simon never wrote any doggerel as tedious as Blowin’ in the Wind. And I don’t see anyone saying he should get a Nobel.
I’m not trying to detract from Dylan (OK, maybe I am, just a little), but isn’t it funny how even the mighty Nobel committee is as swayed by appearances as anyone else? Because Bob’s look – which can be summed up as “Jewish beatnik who pawned his coat” – is undoubtedly as much a part of his legend as his songs. So here, Dylan, have the Ask Hadley award for Most Adored Look. You can keep it next to your Nobel.
Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
Poor Ronald McDonald. Following the scary clown appearances that shocked people around the globe, the burger chain has decided to cut back on public appearances of its pasty-faced mascot.
That is not the only bad news for McDonald’s, which reports third-quarter figures on Friday. According to the Wall Street Journal, an internal memo shows that only one in five millennials has ever tried a Big Mac.
No wonder the company is trying so hard to reinvent itself. It is now 18 months into a transformation plan led by British-born chief executive Steve Easterbrook, which includes offering all-day breakfasts, improving the quality of the food on offer, and selling thousands of its restaurants to franchisees. Last week it said it would be making $130m of restructuring charges in this latest quarter and would increase the number of restaurants sold to franchisees from 3,500 to 4,000, out of a total of 36,000.
In July, McDonald’s reported a 4% fall in second-quarter revenues amid growing consumer uncertainty. Since then, thanks to further turmoil after the Brexit vote and the increasingly vicious US election campaign, things have hardly improved. Still, analysts expect third-quarter revenues to be unchanged or only marginally lower. Anything else could prove very scary for investors.
With Burberry planning to end its experiment with creative director Christopher Bailey also acting as chief executive, the luxury goods group could be back on the road to recovery.
In the summer, the company announced that Bailey would move back to his creative role, and that Marco Gobbetti, the man behind LVMH’s Céline brand, would take over as chief executive some time in 2017. During his tenure Bailey was unfortunate to face a slowdown in demand for luxury goods, particularly in China and Hong Kong. But since the summer things have picked up, helped by the slump in the pound – which is boosting its overseas profits as well as tempting more tourists to visit London and snap up its trademark beige check.
Recent positive comments from LVMH on trading in Hong Kong also bode well for Burberry, which releases its latest update on Tuesday. Despite the delay in Gobbetti starting, analysts at Berenberg said: “The recently revamped management team should provide the necessary talent and focus to steer it in the right direction. We believe that the second-quarter results [this week] could mark Burberry’s return to positive like-for-like sales.”
It’s rare to see a company winning plaudits over its pay policy and then almost immediately being slapped down. But mining group BHP Billiton has achieved that distinction before its annual meeting on Thursday.
Corporate governance advisor Pirc praised the company for not paying chief executive Andrew Mackenzie anything under its various incentive schemes last year, cutting his bonus to zero following the dam disaster at the Samarco mine in Brazil in 2015 and the decline in commodity markets that has undermined the whole sector.
Pirc said: “This is a welcome use of the remuneration committee’s discretion. Furthermore, the ratio of chief executive to average employee pay is considered acceptable.”
But before BHP could get too carried away, Pirc criticised plans to give Mackenzie up to 200% of his salary under further incentive schemes, “which is considered excessive”.
It added: “Performance targets for short-term incentives are not disclosed, making it impossible for shareholders to judge if the targets are challenging.” It said proposed long-term incentive plans were not “an effective means of incentivising performance … not properly long-term and are subject to manipulation due to their discretionary nature”.
What constitutes good – or bad – taste? That is the central question posed at the Barbican’s new exhibition, The Vulgar: Fashion Redefined.
Taking in 500 years of fashion, and featuring over 40 designers, it brings together garments that were, and are, considered “vulgar”, but the connotations are not necessarily negative. Co-curator Judith Clark said: “It’s meant to celebrate, not to humiliate.”
Clark’s fellow curator is psychoanalyst Adam Phillips, and the exhibition aims to unpick the concept of vulgarity in a cerebral way. “We were thinking about the word ‘vulgar’ and the language around it, specifically how violent, divisive and awful it is,” said Clark, adding that they have “attempted to be more celebratory of the word, and not allow it to be a pejorative”.
The exhibition presents modern-day outfits from designers such as Alessandro Michele (Gucci), Mary Katrantzou and Gareth Pugh juxtaposed with outfits from the Renaissance, French revolution and the 1920s, to show the line of influence, commonalities with fabrication and style, and to highlight the cyclical nature of fashion.
The duo has spread the exhibition over 11 rooms, themed around different concepts of vulgarity, as defined by Philips. These include the Pop Art-centric “Too Popular” section, which features Andy Warhol’s Souper Dress alongside sweet wrapper-themed dresses from Jeremy Scott’s Moschino collection. There is also the “Exaggerated Bodies” room, which features Malcolm McLaren and Vivienne Westwood’s “tits” T-shirt and Maison Margiela’s duo of wig shoulder pads.
Then there’s the “Common” room which includes Rihanna’s 9-to-5 boots which she designed in collaboration with Manolo Blahnik. “Common isn’t a pejorative term here, it just means usual. And our usual material is denim,” said Clark. Still, class is deeply felt throughout the 11 rooms – but most literally in the “Ruling In and Ruling Out” room, which includes etiquette guides from the 16th century and beyond.
“The concept of vulgarity is always about defending class boundaries,” explained Clark. “That’s why we included the etiquette books. They take the idea of what’s vulgar, and what’s not, to ridiculous levels.”
Alongside this, there are items that have divided the taste-makers, including the Kimye issue of American Vogue, the Tom Ford editorial for Vogue Paris featuring a sexualised child model, and David LaChapelle’s portrait of a woman snorting a line of diamonds as if they were cocaine. These artefacts help contemporise the exhibition, linking it to today’s fashion climate, where designers have embraced the concept of “ugly” as an aesthetic choice, consciously moving away from notions of classical beauty. Just think of Christopher Kane’s use of Crocs at his London fashion week show; purposefully ugly hair and makeup on the catwalk (Preen, Vetements); and oversized silhouettes, nicknamed “lampshading”.
“There is lots of irony on the catwalk these days,” said Clark. “I think a lot of contemporary designers use humour and referencing in a knowing way. We have featured designers who can twist and turn with the idea of taste and playing with the rules of etiquette.”
With recent fashion talking points such as Moschino paper dolls, Balenciaga’s lawn chair-print dresses and Dolce & Gabbana’s food-themed collection, the idea of the vulgar is constantly being twisted and questioned. “Hopefully, this exhibition will provoke a bit of thought about what the limits of taste are,” said Clark.
The Vulgar, Fashion Redefined is at Barbican, London, from 13 October 2016 to 5 February 2017.
Ted Baker has reported a jump in sales and profit, saying it had overcome “challenging” trading conditions on Britain’s high street in the first half of the year.
The upmarket British fashion brand, which does not advertise, said on Tuesday that pre-tax profit increased by a fifth to £21.5m in the 28 weeks to 13 August, while revenue was up 14.4% to £259.5m.
“Ted Baker continues to perform well across all distribution channels despite challenging trading conditions across our markets,” said Ray Kelvin, the brand’s founder and chief executive.
The clothing and accessories retailer said revenue rose 8.5% in its UK and Europe division, to £131.2m, “despite tough trading conditions and recent events in northern Europe”.
Investors responded positively to the results, with shares in the company up 5%.
Reaction to its new autumn/winter collection had been pleasing, the company said, but “external factors” in markets including the US meant trading continued to be difficult.
The consumer backdrop was also challenging in Asia, but the company said it was positive about the long-term opportunities in the region.
It added: “While the group has had a good start to the financial year, our results for the full year will, as always, be dependent on the second half trading period. Underpinned by the strength of the Ted Baker brand, our business model and balanced distribution channels, we remain confident of delivering continued growth and development.”
Profit was boosted in the first half of the year by a £1.2m foreign currency gain on its overseas earnings resulting from the sharp fall in the value of the pound since the Brexit vote on 23 June. 
The British Retail Consortium warned on Tuesday that a weak pound was likely to drive up companies’ import costs.
Ted Baker said sales over the first half were helped by investment in news stores and online performance, with internet sales up almost 30% at £29.7m. The company has 470 stores, concessions and outlets worldwide, with 186 in the UK.
George Salmon, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the results were encouraging. “Any aspirational fashion brand that can consistently grow sales across five continents without advertising is doing something right.
“This is the company’s first update since Brexit, and is a strong showing in tougher trading conditions. The second half of the year is more important to Ted Baker than the first; nonetheless, the news that sales growth remains robust provides reassurance that the group can continue to thrive, even in challenging times.”
Whether it’s Sean Penn wearing Vans in Fast Times at Ridgemont High, the macabre imagery of Nas’s lyric “Woolrich, Carharrt, gun powder stains”, or the many fetishised descriptions of shoes throughout hip-hop (“I sport New Balance sneakers to avoid a narrow path” and “my Adidas walk through concert doors and roam all over coliseum floors”), it’s clear that streetwear pervades our culture.
While streetwear is synonymous with cities such as New York – and “the streets” in general, wherever they may be – its origins can be traced back to early 80s surf culture. Shawn Stussy, founder of the eponymous clothing brand, started his business selling surfboards and T-shirts on Long Beach, California in 1980. Stussy has since grown to be a figurehead for what is now seen as a predominantly urban genre.
By 2011, the global streetwear industry was valued at an eye-watering $60bn (£47bn) by Reuters. But just what is it about cities and their streets that makes them such effective bases for a successful brand?
By highlighting the subcultures and cities from which they have emerged, streetwear brands anchor their roots in authentic subcultures. This type of marketing targets millennials in particular, who, it is said, respond well to brand authenticity. In America, millennials constitute the majority of the voting age population and the workforce, and so are clearly an important demographic for streetwear labels to address.
“Perhaps the most sceptical group of consumers are the millennials,” says Dr Dimitrios Tsivrikos, a consumer psychologist at University College London. “From the number of field studies I have conducted and my work as a brand consultant, the number one parameter that seems to both entertain and engage millennials is the authenticity of certain brands.
“While the word ‘authentic’ is perhaps the most popular and overused marketing term at the moment, in the eyes of the millennial, authenticity equates to edgy and upcoming cultural hubs. But this is not news to the marketing and branding audience,” Tsivrikos adds, “because these new hubs are simply a contemporary extension of the ‘made of’ factor that used to attract consumer attention. Think high fashion and Paris, or cars and Germany.”
It may be the belief that urban subcultures are founded on love, rather than money, that makes them seem authentic. While it is possible to find ways of making such activities lucrative (the Banksy film Exit Through the Gift Shop, for instance), on the whole they’re seen as coming from the grassroots, and unfunded.
Europe’s largest street art and graffiti festival, Upfest, is still free, and according to its organiser, Stephen Hayles, “the ethos of the festival is all about inclusion,” he says. “We like to include as many artists as possible, and also make it as accessible as possible. With the art being on the street, the artist is giving up their work for the people to view and comment on. There’s a self-indulgence on the part of the artist, because they want to put their work out there, but also it is a gift that the artist is giving. To try to charge for that would go against the principles of graffiti and the ethos of the festival.”
While we have to pay to spend time in many parts of the city, with areas of free public space being diminished, many subcultural activities take place free of charge. Just think of Long Live Southbank’s vehement campaign to keep the undercroft a public space, or that Grime music, which is now in the limelight after the Mercury awards, was originally disseminated via pirate radio aerials on top of housing blocks just off Roman Road in east London’s Bow.
These lifestyles are particularly relevant to millennials, many of whom work a part time job to support an unpaid or low paid career in something that they are passionate about.
DIY culture, which is all about making things happen yourself regardless of money or job opportunities, has grown as a result of the cohort’s access to technology. Amy Spencer, author of DIY: The Rise of Lo-fi Culture told me that it “has always existed ... DIY culture tends to increase at times when we have access to new technology. So, the rise in DIY culture at the moment is because now more people than ever are able to do it themselves. There are opportunities to reach audiences that we couldn’t reach before.”
If authenticity means doing things ourselves – for love, and not money (and interacting with the city on our own terms, without paying to be there) – it could be argued that brands can never be truly authentic when their ultimate aim is to capitalise on their roots in urban subcultures.
Indeed, the most successful brands can keep their consumers feeling grounded and authentic with faux rips in their jeans, as though they too participate in subcultural activities.
But this line of thought does not play into the prevalent narrative, which is so commonplace in contemporary rap music: that we can all start from the bottom and work our way up to the top. When hugely successful streetwear brands invoke their origins in cities and their subcultures, they reinforce this rags to riches narrative in the consumer’s mind, and present it as a tantalising possibility for them also.
Supreme provides a good example of how a brand can successfully capitalise on its origins in an urban subculture. In April 1994, James Jebbia (who had previously helped to open Stussy’s flagship store in New York) opened Supreme on Lafayette Street in downtown Manhattan. The spacious shop, which cost around $12,000 to open, stocked clothes for an older demographic, which skateboarding brands had previously neglected. The shop has since grown into a brand, and in 2012 James Jebbia’s net worth was estimated at $40m.
Although Supreme now has a global audience, it remains exclusive with only 10 stores worldwide, six of which are in Japan. As well as having a large following in Japan, they boast an impressive online community of users that discuss, buy, and re-sell Supreme product. SupTalk, a popular Facebook page for Europe’s Supreme fans, has over 60,000 members.
Vans, which is now owned by VF Corporation (and according to Forbes, in 2015 was expected to make $2.3bn in sales), created the House of Vans events space in an effort to remain engaged with its subcultural origins. The site in Brooklyn hosts live music, art shows, and skateboarding events.
Doug Palladini, Vans Global Brand President, says: “House of Vans can be a large, permanent space in London, or a pop-up, moveable space winding its way across Asia, as long as the brand comes to life at every stop. This allows us to strategically place ourselves, down to the right street corner, and stand out with a bespoke, ‘can’t miss’ experience.”
However, brands are not always successful in their engagements with cities and their subcultures. When Dr Martens commissioned a piece of art to be painted in Stokes Croft, Bristol, many felt that the advert jarred with the spirit of the place. Tsivrikos commented, saying that:
“Such acts are perceived by millennial customers to be too obvious, and very much against the ethos of graffiti culture, which still holds elements of the anti-establishment movement and believes in artistic expression. When brands engage in such ill-advised acts, they are putting themselves at risk of being perceived as too obvious, far too commercial, and disrespectful of the local rules. These are qualities that go very much against what a cool zeitgeist brand is perceived to be by their number one customer base: the millennials.”
Brands tread a fine line when they sell the rags to riches narrative, which hopeful millennials buy in to. Are high priced goods commendable, because both our success and the success of the brand is predicated on them, or simply a sign that the brand is out of touch with the lifestyles of its target audience?
Whichever way you look at it, many of these brands have genuine origins in urban subcultures, and appear to a lot of millennials as the last vestiges of a world in which there was such a thing as social mobility.
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter and Facebook and join the discussion
A third of seven- to 10-year-old girls believe that they are judged on their appearance and a quarter feel the need to be perfect, according to a study by Girlguiding UK.
The charity’s annual girls’ attitudes survey, published on Tuesday, found that girls were suffering from a crisis in body confidence, with 61% of those aged seven to 21 feeling happy with how they look, down from 73% in 2011.
The study – the largest annual research of its kind – suggests that girls as young as seven feel under pressure to be pretty.
More than a third (35%) of seven- to 10 year-old girls agreed that women were rated more on their appearance than their abilities, and 36% said they were made to feel their looks were their most important attribute. 
Campaigners said the findings showed the need to combat the “objectification and harassment … ruining girls’ lives”. 
The survey also revealed low levels of body confidence among girls. Almost two-fifths (38%) of the same age group think they are not pretty enough, while a similar number feel they are judged more on their appearance than their ability. Almost a quarter (23%) said they felt they needed to be perfect, while 15% said they felt embarrassed or ashamed by the way they looked.
The majority of seven- to 10-year-olds said that what would most improve their lives would be if people would stop judging girls and women on the way they look.
The survey questioned 1,627 girls and young women aged between seven and 21 about a range of issues from health and wellbeing to relationships and careers.
Sam Smethers, chief executive of the Fawcett Society, said women and girls were “persistently judged on what they look like” and suffered “significantly higher” rates of depressions and mental illness. “This is serious. As a society we need to face up to the fact that objectification and harassment is ruining girls’ lives and we are letting it happen,” she said.
Dr Carole Easton, chief executive of the Young Women’s Trust, said the survey revealed the presence of “gender inequality” from a young age. “If we are serious about ensuring that everyone has an equal opportunity to get on in life, then much more must be done to ensure a level playing field – starting from childhood and into young adulthood, not least by challenging gender stereotypes,” she said.
Becky Hewitt, Girlguiding director said: “This year’s girls’ attitudes survey demonstrates the shocking impact that focusing on girls’ appearance is having on the youngest girls in society.”
“Girls have told us to stop judging them on how they look. Every day in guiding, girls inspire us with their bravery, sense of adventure and their kindness. We are calling on everyone to show girls that they are valued for who they are – not what they look like.”
Lyra, 10, a Brownie from south London, said: “I think more girls are judged on their appearance than boys. I don’t think it’s fair that men get treated differently to women. You have to treat everyone the same.”
Liddy Buswell, 18, Girlguiding advocate and Brownie leader, said she was shocked but not surprised by the findings. “I’ve experienced these issues first-hand. I’ve witnessed girls unwilling to speak to groups because of how they look, I’ve heard girls saying they’ve been called names at school and aren’t confident trying new activities as a result.
“No girl should have to worry about the way she looks – she should be having fun and enjoying herself. This year’s survey is a damning indication that something needs to be done to tackle this growing issue.”
Girlguiding UK launched its first “body confidence” badge in 2014 in response to what it described as a crisis in how girls perceive themselves. It is now launching a new social media campaign to make the public think about how they compliment or praise girls, asking them to praise young women for their achievements or attributes, rather than the way they look, using the hashtag #YouAreAmazing. 
Anne Longfield, the children’s commissioner for England, said: “Children I speak to tell me they sometimes feel enormous pressure to behave and look a certain way. It’s disturbing that so many young girls think their appearance is the most important thing about them and large numbers feel they have to be perfect. Concerns about body shape can spiral out of control into eating disorders or mental health problems without the right support.
“Girls, and increasingly boys, are bombarded with images in the media and the 24/7 availability of social media can put additional pressure on children. It can be really helpful if parents are able to discuss and challenge unhealthy attitudes children may have and don’t ignore warning signs. Schools also have a huge role to play in building resilience to the negative pressures and attitudes girls may face, and lessons that do this need to be a priority in all school timetables.”
It has been an emotional Paris fashion week. The Vogue-versus-the-bloggers plotline had laid bare the tension and rivalry embedded in a group of people currently spending 12 hours of every day of the week together, even before Kim Kardashian’s ordeal at gunpoint escalated the nervy mood.
So at Stella McCartney’s Monday morning show at the Opéra Garnier you could cut the atmosphere with a knife. Or, it turns out, you could cut through it with a flashmob finale in which the models ditched the po-faced strutting in favour of a brilliantly silly dance, which choreographer Blanca Li had created late the night before, that being the only time the models weren’t busy with other shows. “I wanted to have a more emotional connection this season,” said McCartney backstage. As a British brand showing in Paris, she wanted her first show after June’s referendum to “show love, throw our arms around everyone, make people happy”.
McCartney’s fashion week raison d’être has always been about more than aesthetics. Her pioneering anti-fur and anti-leather stance, widely considered the hippy eccentricity of a Beatles daughter when she launched her label 15 years ago, has since been adopted by Ralph Lauren, Tommy Hilfiger and Giorgio Armani. Last week, her brand released its first annual environmental profit and loss accounts, examining the environmental impact of the business from raw material to retail. This focus on sustainability reflects a nascent change across the industry, as fashion responds to a new generation of millennial consumers who expect their clothes to reflect their values.
A racer-back T-shirt dress on the Stella McCartney catwalk spelled out “NO FUR”; a jumpsuit read “NO LEATHER”. “We’ve got a lot to say at this house, and sometimes you’ve just got to spell it out,” McCartney said after the show.
The great Parisian designer Sonia Rykiel, who died in August aged 86, would have loved McCartney’s finale. Rykiel always felt that the traditional frosty stalk of the catwalk model jarred with her passion for clothes that liberated and empowered women, and preferred her models to walk arm in arm, smiling and chatting.
The first Sonia Rykiel catwalk since the death of the label’s founder was bookended by tributes. It was staged at the École des Beaux Arts in Paris’s Saint Germain district, not far from where Rykiel’s fashion business began with her 1960s Rue de Grenelle boutique, and opened with a lineup of models whose initialled sweaters spelled out “Rykiel Forever”. This being fashion, however, the true homage was not in the wording but in the silhouette: the sweaters had the distinctive skinny rib shape, with tight sleeves and high armholes, with which Rykiel made her name as an icon of a distinctive Saint Germain aesthetic.
Rykiel herself had stepped down from design duties long before her death, but her daughter and granddaughter remain engaged in the brand. The challenge for Julie de Libran, an alumni of Prada and Louis Vuitton who has been the creative director since 2014, is to keep the Rykiel spirit alive and dynamic. (Memories may be precious, but mawkishness doesn’t sell.) This collection channelled the confident, independent spirit that Rykiel represented into modern pieces: a nautical spin on oversized jackets, an August-in-Provence take on smocked summer tunics. 
It was an accomplished and contemporary collection. But the ultimate tribute to the talent of Rykiel were the skinny rib, rainbow-striped Lurex sweaters in which models lined up under the finale’s glitter shower: a classic look of the original Sonia Rykiel era that stood out even today as the most instantly desirable of pieces.
Cath Kidston, the fashion brand famous for its floral patterns, is set for significant expansion in Asia after it was taken over by a Hong Kong-based investment firm.
Baring Private Equity Asia has bought out TA Associates, a US private equity company, to take control of Cath Kidston. The new owners have appointed William Flanz, the former boss of Gucci, as chairman of Cath Kidston and have identified Asia as a key market for the brand.
Baring first invested in Cath Kidston two years ago when it acquired a 40% stake in a deal that valued that company at around £250m. The new deal, which involves Baring buying TA’s 40% stake, is understood to value Cath Kidston at significantly more than £250m, although the price has not been disclosed.
Cath Kidston founded the eponymous business with its first store in Holland Park, London, in 1993. It has become renowned for its bags, accessories and clothing in a range of floral designs.
Kidston still owns approximately 11% of the business, although she stepped down as creative director in 2014. The management team owns the remaining 9% of the brand.
The company now has 226 shops, with 70% outside the UK. It has 133 shops in Asia already and will open in India later this year.
Last week it launched a collaboration with Disney that involves a collection of products based on Winnie the Pooh. Cath Kidston said the new products led to its biggest ever day of full-price sales online, with 58 mugs sold every hour on the day of launch and a 500% increase in online sales in Korea.
Kenny Wilson, chief executive of Cath Kidston, said: “We are entering a really exciting new stage under a single owner. Baring Asia’s decision to increase its shareholding is a fantastic endorsement of the potential of the Cath Kidston brand and I would like to welcome Bill Flanz.
“This year has been our most successful start to the year, proving the strength of our product and the continued and growing appeal of the brand to existing and new customers. As well as expanding internationally, we continue to innovate as demonstrated by our new collaboration with Disney, which lands in stores this month. We are very excited about the future.”
In one sense, the new issue of British Vogue is on the money. A whole issue with no actual models. In 2016. And after Alexandra Shulman previously said no one wants to see real people on the front of her magazine. Non-models are increasing on the catwalk to the point that they have a name – nodels – and they are becoming the norm.
Eckhaus Latta’s show last season cast the musician Dev Hynes and poet Grace Dunham, who is the sister of writer and actor Lena. Nasir Mazhar has been street-casting models for years (essentially attractive people who don’t necessarily fit the requisite modelling dimensions) and the Balenciaga show featured head designer Demna Gvasalia’s boyfriend, friends and muses – as well as “proper” models.
Still, the fact that Vogue’s “real people” issue is being talked about in the news suggests some of the motivation behind it was publicity. The September issue makes headlines; others not so much.
It may also have been a way to confound the critics: showcasing the people you said no one wants to see before a petition forces your hand.
Of course this is Vogue so they can do what they want, and next month it will be business as usual. But there has, undeniably, been a shift in awareness and Shulman is no fool. Who has the power in the fashion industry – the designers, the magazines or the consumers? We buy fashion magazines for aspirational reasons but we also, sometimes, want that aspiration to feel attainable rather than the stuff of fantasy.
The issue, out on Thursday, is likely to still feature plenty of pages of advertising, so casting it as a “model-free issue” feels a little misleading. Likewise, Emily Blunt is on the cover because the fashion world would probably have drawn the line at a civilian in that spot. And who knows how well it will sell? Seeing a successful ice-cream maker in a buttery Hermes suit makes it feel within grasp to real women … even if we still can’t afford the suit.
The new issue of British Vogue is to be a “model-free zone” after editors decided to use only “real” women to showcase the designer clothes featured in the magazine.
Among the women included in the issue are the architectural historian Shumi Bose, the charity director Brita Fernandez Schmidt, Hello Love Studio creative director and Hello Beautiful founder Jane Hutchison, and ice-cream brand creator Kitty Travers, as well as some of the women behind London’s Crossrail project.
Alexandra Shulman, the editor of British Vogue, said she commissioned the project because she felt strongly that professional women, or women in positions of authority or power, should be able to indulge their interest in fashion without it seeming frivolous. “In this country, there is still a stigma attached to clearly enjoying how you look and experimenting with it if you are a woman in the public eye and not in the fashion or entertainment business,” she told the Telegraph.
Shulman has edited British Vogue since 1992 and is venerated for her egalitarian attitude to body image. She does not publish stories about diets or cosmetic surgery, and in 2009 wrote a letter to all major designers arguing that the tiny sample sizes they offered for shoots encouraged models to be unhealthily thin. “I was also frustrated by a few designers’ PRs choosing only to lend their clothes if they approved of the appearance of the subject to be photographed rather than what they did,” she said.
The cover of the new Vogue issue, out on 6 October, may been seen to contradict Shulman’s previous claims that readers do not want a “real person” on the front of the magazine. In an interview for BBC Radio 2 in 2014, the editor told guest presenter Lily Allen: “People always say, ‘Why do you have thin models? That’s not what real people look like,’ but nobody really wants to see a real person looking like a real person on the cover of Vogue.
“I think Vogue is a magazine that’s about fantasy to some extent, and dreams, and an escape from real life. People don’t want to buy a magazine like Vogue to see what they see when they look in a mirror. They can do that for free.”
Shulman defended the choice of the actor Emily Blunt as the cover star of the “real” issue by pointing out that she plays an everyday woman in her new film, The Girl on the Train. According to Vogue, Blunt joked about appearing on her first cover: “It took three hours of hair and makeup to get me looking this real!”
The issue comes after H&M used the 60-year-old Scottish stylist Gillean McLeod as the face of its swimwear range and US brand J Crew used staff members and their friends instead of models to showcase its clothes at New York fashion week.
The Women’s Equality party, meanwhile, is campaigning to change the fashion industry’s approach to body image by calling for designers showing in London to display at least two sample sizes, one of which must be more than a UK size 12.
Sophie Walker, the party’s leader, told the Guardian last month that these “tiny, tiny little clothes are such that normal-sized women have to starve themselves to fit into them. And we’re not talking a three-day soup diet here, which would be bad enough; we’re talking weeks and weeks of systematic malnutrition, for which young women are paid to fit into these tiny little sizes.”
Last week, four US Vogue editors were branded “jealous and hypocritical” after complaining about the presence of “pathetic” and “desperate” fashion bloggers at Milan fashion week.
Shulman distanced herself from the row, tweeting:
Live by the sword, die by the sword. That’s what Vogue.com’s senior editors should be thinking at the moment. Ruefully, if they can do that without exacerbating wrinkles. Last week they were simply going about their business disparaging and belittling people – just a normal day at the office for those who professionally sit in judgment on what others are wearing – when they got a nasty shock.
Let me explain. Apparently it’s just been Milan fashion week. I was surprised to hear that because it seems to me it’s always London fashion week. Not literally always, but very nearly literally always. It genuinely feels like it’s absolutely always London fashion week this week, last week or next week. Is that the system? That it’s once every three weeks? If so, I suppose that leaves two thirds of the time for it to be Paris fashion week, New York fashion week, Bristol fashion week (for tidy sailors) or Milan fashion week, which is the one it was last week.
At the end of Milan fashion week, the staff of Vogue.com wrote an article on the internet – a blog, I suppose you’d call it – discussing what the week had been like, what everyone had learned and why it absolutely hadn’t been a vacuous jamboree consecrated to the monetisation of narcissism. But the main issues the Vogue.com team had wanted to raise – the future of trousers, perhaps; how a raspberry sock makes a stylish and practical epaulette warmer; the advent of the thigh-gap storage sporran, a great place for the malnourished to keep cocaine and diet pills – got rather lost because of the digs they all made at bloggers.
Other bloggers, that is, not each other. Not people who get paid to write a blog by a magazine that also has a printed-out version for the dentist’s, but a group who seem to be known variously as bloggers, influencers and street-style stars. The ladies at Vogue.com absolutely hate this group and really let rip at them in a tone of weirdly feverish condescension. Vogue’s creative digital director, Sally Singer, started it, writing in brackets to emphasise her contempt: “Note to bloggers who change head-to-toe, paid-to-wear outfits every hour: Please stop. Find another business. You are heralding the death of style.”
Her use of the word “style” is illuminating because it reveals weakness. She put “style” rather than “fashion”. It suits her haughty tone, of course. While affecting to give those not actually under her control an off-hand instruction (which they will defy), she also seems to be alluding to something more significant, more permanent than the merely trendy. But she isn’t. The sense of something being stylish is subjective and, as such, will never die unless we create a world that contains nothing at all to which anyone at all has a positive aesthetic response. Talk of “the death of style” is empty rhetoric.
“Fashion”, on the other hand, means something solid. It refers to objects, usually clothes, manufactured to new, cutting edge and/or popular designs. I never know what’s fashionable but plenty of people always do and, at any given time, some things are and some things aren’t. Sometimes flares or ripped jeans or kipper ties or powdered wigs are in and sometimes they’re out. It’s a matter of fact. The discussion and prediction of such facts is what fashion journalism and Vogue are for.
But Sally Singer couldn’t refer to “the death of fashion” because that sounds wrong: something will always be in fashion. Saying “the death of fashion” is like saying “the death of recently”, “the end of the latest thing”. And the latest thing at the moment is the phenomenon of bloggers, influencers and street-style stars. These people, such as Chiara Ferragni, Susie Lau and Shea Marie, whose names mean nothing to me, have huge online followings, can create and redirect trends, and make a lot of money doing it. Essentially they have the same business model as Vogue.
These bloggers are, by definition, fashionable, even if Sally Singer and her colleagues don’t consider them stylish. So, note to Vogue.com: never mind style – that’s not what you’re paid to care about. If what you find stylish is not fashionable, then neither are you.
Now, I would say that being fashionable doesn’t matter. But the staff of Vogue.com can’t say that. Their entire raison d’être has been to elevate and celebrate the value of being in touch with, and responding to, the latest trends. They can’t suddenly go off all that when it gets a bit youthful and digital and scary. That’s the top of a slippery slope that leads down to comfortable shoes.
Of course they weren’t trying to say that fashion doesn’t matter – they were trying to be the arbiters of fashion, which I suppose has historically been the Vogue journalist’s role. It was an attempt to assert authority. Sarah Mower, Vogue.com’s chief critic, called the bloggers “pathetic” and “desperate”; Alessandra Codinha, its fashion news editor, said they were “pretty embarrassing” and that going to bloggers for style was “like going to a strip club looking for romance”; and Nicole Phelps, the director of the Vogue Runway app, called them “sad” and said “it’s distressing, as well, to watch so many brands participate”.
That last remark is a bit of a giveaway. That does sound pretty distressing. If you’re looking to sell advertising spots in Vogue, I imagine it has a positively tragic quality. Phelps’s implication that these brands had somehow let themselves down by associating with bloggers is a hopeless attempt to assert her dated view of the dignity of haute couture above the dictates of commerce.
Essentially, the Voguesters’ bid to make the new girls feel small didn’t work. It didn’t make the bloggers seem gauche, it made the old school journalists seem out of touch – not something the fashion world readily forgives. As “fashion influencer” Shea Marie put it: “You are exactly the type of people that have given the fashion world the cold, unwelcoming and ruthless reputation it has had in the past.” And the really hurtful word there is “past”. It falls to others, bloggers probably, to give it the cold, unwelcoming and ruthless reputation I expect it will continue to have in the future.
Old bullies make way for new. But ageing and mortality must hurt all the more if you’ve made a profession of praising novelty. When Sally Singer lashed out at the bloggers, talking desperately about “the death of style”, she must have been terrified. Because, ultimately, that’s not the death they herald.
This was meant to be Vogue’s year. The British version of the magazine turned 100, resulting in, among other celebratory goings-on, an exhibition at London’s National Portrait Gallery, Vogue 100: A Century of Style, telling the story of one of the world’s most influential magazines. But a turn of events, and the social media reaction, threw a stiletto at the brand’s well-manicured public appearance and demonstrated very publicly an insurgency that is under way next to the catwalk.
During a round-table discussion about Milan fashion week, editors on Vogue’s American edition gave their views on style bloggers, and it was damning. Questioning the street-style business model of wearing paid-for brand placements, they used descriptors like “desperate” and said it “herald(ed) the death of style”. In response, style blogger Susie Bubble tweeted: “The fashion establishment don’t want their circles enlarged and for the ivory tower to remain just that. Towering and impenetrable.”
The incident highlighted how the ground beneath the establishment’s feet has shifted this season. See-now-buy-now and genderless catwalks have reflected economic and social shifts towards a younger mindset, while Bubble’s point about enlarging circles could equally read as a comment on what’s been happening on the front row (the “Frow”) in this summer’s global fashion shows.
Traditionally the place where old Hollywood glamour mixed with fashion journalism, the Frow has shifted its allegiances, actively courting a younger and more social media-savvy crowd. Dolce & Gabbana’s Milan fashion week show was an extreme example of this. It saw the fashion house fly in a range of millennial celebrities, such as Cameron Dallas, Lily-Rose Depp, Lucky Blue Smith and Rafferty Law, to sit in pride of place. The Frow resembled a particularly large group selfie, where mainstream media journalists were relegated to the second row.
Meanwhile, the kitschy, high-energy presentation featured street dancers, model Hailey Baldwin and a pre-show soundtrack of Justin Bieber, pointed attempts to capture not just hearts and minds but the smartphone’s lens too. As the show came to a close, exiting fashionistas, such as Anna Wintour, were met by swarms of pre-pubescent girls screaming not for her but for the heart-throbs they follow on Vine or Instagram. It was Beatlemania for Generation Z.
Backstage before the show, Stefano Gabbana admitted that the label was trying to appeal to a younger market. “We looked at the millennials [for inspiration],” he said. “Everyone wants to be young.”
The appeal to fashion labels is clear: a Frow full of social media-savvy celebs creates publicity and generates sales. “Vloggers, Viners and Instagram celebs almost exist for endorsements,” says Malcolm Mackenzie, editor of We Love Pop magazine. “They don’t have a day job, like shooting a movie, to get in the way of self-promotion, because self-promotion is their day job.”
But arranging the seating plan of the Frow can be a tricky jigsaw to solve. “My feeling is that it’s always a balance – you want heavy-hitter celebrities, but the editors are just as vital with huge followings, too,” says Mandi Lennard, fashion PR and consultant. “It’s a delicate balance, as you don’t want to make an editor feel neglected.”
But perhaps editors just need to adapt to the times: 2016 has seen the fashion industry focus on young celebrities who fit the Hailey Baldwin template: heritage names with large social media followings. “Stars like Dallas have a direct line to millions of fans who avidly watch everything they do, so it’s a no-brainer for business to want in on the action,” says Mackenzie. Things can only get younger.
She modelled at a Jean Paul Gaultier show aged four and caused controversy with her appearance in a Vogue Enfants editorial aged 10 that some called sexualised. She is signed to IMG Models and has a burgeoning film career.
This actress is the star of TV show Ringer and is set to star in the JD Salinger biopic, Rebel in the Rye, with Nicholas Hoult.
The son of Pamela Anderson and Tommy Lee did his first fashion spread for Nylon magazine and recently appeared in a video for Saint Laurent.
The older son of Anderson and Lee is another model, signed to Next LA/IMG and has been linked with Justin Bieber’s ex, Sofia Richie. Was on the Frow at the Dolce & Gabbana show.
French singer, actress and model signed to IMG. Used to date Brooklyn Beckham.
Heiress, Tatler cover star, New York University student and singer (under the name Izzy Getty).
The granddaughter of designer Diane von Fürstenberg is a model who started working for Hillary Clinton’s campaign.
Son of Jude Law and Sadie Frost and, yes, another model, has walked for DKNY and Dolce & Gabbana.
Swedish singer and songwriter, NME cover star and Best New Artist nominee at the MTV VMAs. Has 1.9m followers on Instagram.
With 184,000 Instagram followers, he has modelled in the Yeezy Season 1 show and featured in campaigns for Hood By Air and Tommy Hilfiger. Complex magazine called him the “coolest teenager on the internet”.
People think my job is so glamorous, but it isn’t. I work with a mix of models and celebrities, creating fashion shoots for magazines. Models are much easier: they are professional and never ask for freebies. Celebrities, on the other hand... One 1960s rock star asked if she could have a pair of sunglasses and, before I could say no, just took them. They cost £300. Sometimes the labels who loan the clothes don’t mind. And I didn’t mind so much, because I liked her. She was quite charming in her rudeness.
Some people make it clear they don’t want me to talk to them, or even look at them. One supermodel arrived three hours late, then spent another couple of hours looking at Twitter while everyone waited for her. Then she was a nightmare. She was a world-class bully, and said she had never met a stylist as rude as me. But I fought back, and she was lovely after that – though she made me sign a non-disclosure agreement, not to talk about the shoot. That’s what difficult celebs do.
Another celeb turned up without a bra and asked if I had one. When I said no, she started shaking me and said, “How. Can. You. Be. A. Stylist. And. Not. Have. A. Bra?” I was speechless. I always bring a bra now.
I have to try to kill them with kindness. When it doesn’t work, I go to the toilet, have a little cry and then I’m fine. With celebrities, I often think, “I don’t want to do this any more.” But working with models, making beautiful pictures, I think, “This is the best job in the world.” It all depends on the pictures: if they look great, I feel proud, and I don’t care how badly anyone behaved.
• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com
When four American Vogue editors decided to embed a series of stream-of-consciousness rants against a group of people they lumped together as “bloggers” within a Milan fashion week roundup, they could not have predicted the firestorm they’d unleash.
Blogger itself is a term so outmoded that I’m surprised a publication that likes to think of itself as being firmly on the cutting edge is still using it. Brands have been referring to bloggers as digital influencers for some years now, and, as it would seem to Vogue’s bizarre disgust, plenty of those influencers don’t actually have blogs. Or, if they do bother, they are a small offshoot of their main platform, Instagram.
I started blogging in 2006, while I was still a fashion editor. At the time I’d seen one other blog, Belle de Jour – the anonymous diary of a sex worker and, while I wasn’t going to be following in her career footsteps, I was inspired by the idea that there was a place online where I could collect my thoughts anonymously.
There was no road map for monetising blogs back then beyond parlaying your writing into a book deal, or perhaps a newspaper column, if you were lucky. So, although I now have a business built around my digital platform, I still find it hard to comprehend that blogging, once seen as the preserve of the enthusiastic amateur, has reached a level where fashion bloggers are being pitched against editors from American Vogue in a war of words, laced with vitriol and a dash of mean-spiritedness.
The main thrust of the Vogue editors’ collective complaint was the spectacle that takes place outside fashion shows, where both dressed-up attendees and overdressed attention-seekers have their photographs taken by a mob of shouting, desperate photographers. I don’t think any regular attendee at the collections, whether in New York, Milan, Paris or London, regards having to push their way through the street-style bunfight outside the shows with any joy. No one wants to be roughly pushed aside, toes squashed, ribs elbowed, as the huge photographer pack rushes, lemming-like, to capture another street-style image.
Equally the rise of street-style photography and the seemingly insatiable appetite from, yes, magazines like Vogue for those images, has led to the rise of a kind of style that has been developed solely for the camera. Forget the traditional all-black editor outfit: these looks can be retina-burning. The more over-the-top the look, the more the photographers like it, and the less it has to do with fashion.
If the editors had just commented on this, I think there would have been some understanding nods – but no, they had to wrap it in some nasty commentary, with Sarah Mower blaming it all on the “professional blogger bit”, along with a few patronising eye-rolls from Alessandra Codinha, the vogue.com fashion news editor, who said: “It’s all pretty embarrassing – even more so when you consider what else is going on in the world.”
Someone needs to get off their high horse: last time I checked reporting fashion news wasn’t exactly on a par with covering Syria.
Blaming “bloggers” for the mess at shows is naive at best, stupid at worst. Some of the famous street-style stars are, in fact print editors. Caroline Issa (Tank), Giovanna Englebert (Vogue Nippon), Anna Della Russo (Vogue Nippon) Christine Centenera (Vogue Australia) are now some of the most photographed women in the world. They understand, as do the digital influencers, that they are ambassadors for not just their publications but themselves, and that there is serious money to be made from developing a recognisable personal brand.
Secondly, the print publications are colluding in this circus: they use street-style as both content in the magazines and as clickbait on line. They cite them as “inspiration”, and, desperate to grab on to the millennial audience, they put the girls who are famous for their outfits on magazine covers. Chiara Ferragni, of The Blonde Salad, has been on the cover of six Condé Nast titles to date, including Vogue España, and Kendall Jenner, whose entire power base arguably comes from her 66.5 million Instagram followers was the September cover star of US Vogue.
Editors may not like how the shows have evolved, but it’s time to face the inevitable: the purpose of a fashion show has now changed, from a trade conference where a closed circle of insiders disseminated their opinions to the masses to a public forum where brands, editors and “bloggers” fight for attention in an overcrowded space by any means possible.
The Vogue editors’ comments also addressed the matter of borrowed clothing and paid appearances with Nicole Phelps, director of Vogue Runway, proclaiming: “It’s not just sad for the women who preen for the cameras in borrowed clothes, it’s distressing, as well, to watch so many brands participate.”
I find this mystifying and, to be honest, just plain ridiculous. Not only is the hypocrisy mindboggling, as the borrowing and gifting of product – clothes, bags, shoes, makeup – is endemic across the entire fashion industry from the most senior editor to the assistant in the fashion closet, but brands – and everyone else – knows, or should know, that these days the quickest way to raise awareness of a product and sell, sell, sell, is to get it on the back of the influencers who then wear those clothes to the shows – which then, of course, appear in Vogue et al in the endless stream of street-style photographs.
Vogue also seems to take exception to the idea that influencers are paid to wear clothes at the shows, with Codinha chiming in: “I have to think that soon people will wise up to how particularly gross the whole practice of paid appearances and borrowed outfits looks.” I’m at a loss to understand how being paid for your job is gross, or how being paid to wear clothes is any different from advertisers pressuring magazines to shoot their clothes on models, or brand ambassadors – actresses, models, athletes, being paid to do press with magazines as part of their contracts.
Vogue creative digital director Sally Singer’s exhortation to bloggers to “find another business” was perhaps the most extraordinary comment: while not all bloggers can command the fees of Chiara Ferragni, who is estimated to earn over $10m a year, it is not uncommon these days for digital influencers to turn over six figures.
With the going rate for a single Instagram post for an account with 50,000+ followers hovering at about the £500 mark, there are plenty of fashion Instagrammers making north of £50,000 a year just from posting two sponsored images a week. Who’s having the last laugh now?
There is a picture on Instagram that perfectly captures the current row about who decides what is fashion. The dispute is between Vogue magazine, fashion’s ultimate arbiter for the last 100 years, and the fashion bloggers regarded by their millions of social media followers as the real deal. The picture, posted by the blogger Caroline Vreeland, was taken during Milan’s fashion week. It shows the editor of American Vogue, Anna Wintour, timelessly chic, being followed down the street by a much younger woman in a shiny vinyl coat, black shorts and fishnets. She is pointing and laughing at Ms Wintour’s unresponsive back. Street style challenges high fashion; digital unsettles analogue; democracy threatens elite.
In one way this is a familiar story, an everyday tale of the brutal disruption of an old business model by a new one. Vogue’s accountants will undoubtedly have a nasty headache from the financial success of a handful of bloggers such as Susie Bubble and Chiara Ferragni, young entrepreneurs who have monetised their personalities by turning their online presence into brands and their millions of followers into a market for their own lines of shoes or swimwear. The bloggers have brilliantly exploited the capacity of social media to be a global platform for free-spirited creativity: now Vogue accuses them of selling out to commerce.
Some of Vogue’s criticisms verge on the petulant; but the accusation that the bloggers are selling out goes to the heart of a real debate. Posing for photographers in paid-to-wear fashion, as some do, rather than taking selfies showing off their own style, says Vogue, “heralds the death of style”. The bloggers, laughing and pointing again, note that Vogue itself depends on close commercial relationships with the major fashion brands. Bloggers, in contrast, build their brand on being real people, wearing real clothes; they see themselves as self-created style celebrities and entrepreneurs. For them, Vogue’s attack is motivated by envy of the way their authenticity has usurped traditional authority, directly challenging glossy magazines such as Vogue, whose historic genius is to put together fantastical, highly staged images that are as desirable as they are remote from reality.
Vogue’s real response to the challenge was to adapt the “real” appeal of the digital fashionistas for itself. The high-street fashion chain H&M is at it too. Its latest commercial features a diverse mix of models and bloggers (and an almost subliminal glimpse of a hairy armpit) set to a version of the Tom Jones song She’s a Lady. Fashion houses now often tear up invitations to the fashion editors and put the bloggers on the front row, final proof that authenticity is the new authority.
But if the bloggers are becoming enmeshed in the world of big business, they may have set the clock running on their claim to authenticity. Their success depended on their ability to sell themselves as unique personalities acting autonomously. They are not all conventionally good-looking, they claim to be Anyone, living in Anytown. Now they are becoming recognised celebrities, sought out by the industry, and they are changing from creative artists into commercial players. For a fleeting moment they democratised fashion. Now it looks very much as if they may be becoming another elite, new and young – but an elite just the same.
Bouchra Jarrar’s first show for Lanvin at Paris fashion week kicked off at noon on Wednesday, under bright lights at the Hôtel de Ville. This represents a shift for the French fashion house. Under the direction of Alber Elbaz for 14 years, Lanvin was always an evening show often soundtracked with disco. The time and place announced a new mood and the clothes in the collection were like night and day, too. 
The first look was an ivory jacket worn over a satin shirt dress. This was followed by a chiffon kilt, pyjama suiting in pinstripes, floaty floral gowns and embellished vests. Most looks came with jewelled flowers pinned somewhere, and embellishment was everywhere. 
These were clothes that fit into women’s lives – or the lifestyles of women who can afford luxury fashion, anyway. Nothing was even slightly avant garde: classic glamour was the general theme. A lot of the designs looked ready for the corporate balls of its wealthy customers, a white satin ruched gown, an asymmetric ivory dress with black sash, a black satin dress cut to skim the body, sandals with diamanté chain-mail cuff. 
Some pieces had an off-duty feel, such as a loose embellished top with oversized cardigan and flat sandals, a biker jacket or tailored trousers. Critics might grumble about the lack of Elbaz-like runway razzle-dazzle, but real life has reached Lanvin in the hands of Jarrar.
Jarrar, dressed in a chic satin shirt and black trousers, answered questions backstage through a translator. While hugging her son, she said she found the legacy of Jeanne Lanvin – who founded the house in 1889, originally designing clothes for her daughter Marguerite – very inspiring. 
“It was effortless to find the connection,” she said. “I wanted to mix the intellectual with the creative.” And the romantic, Jarrar was asked? “Tous jours,” came the reply. Jarrar was named artistic director of the house in March. “Her timeless style is in keeping with the style and the values of our company,” said chief executive Michèle Huiban. 
The 45-year-old designer worked as the studio director under Nicolas Ghesquiere at Balenciaga and in the couture department of Christian Lacroix. She launched her own brand in 2010 and joined the couture schedule in 2013. Her designs quickly gained a cult following of women who liked the clean lines of minimalism at the top end of luxury. 
Elbaz left Lanvin in October of 2015. His louche designs and comedic personality – complete with signature bow tie and spectacles – stood for Lanvin during his reign. He was much liked in fashion and at his HQ, with the Lanvin team protesting his departure. He has since described his exit as “his tragedy”. It is widely believed that Elbaz was pushed out of Lanvin by the house’s financiers, led by majority shareholder Shaw-Lan Wang who bought Lanvin in 2001, and originally recruited Elbaz. 
Profits have certainly declined in recent years, from £10.25m in 2012 to £2.5m in 2014. In that context, Jarrar’s collection makes a lot of sense.
If Lanvin was about commerce, other shows on Wednesday were at the more artistic end of fashion. 
Maison Margiela, under the direction of John Galliano, was a mash-up of sportswear and classic French staples. Trench coats were reworked as dresses and models in brightly coloured headgear wore outfits featuring wetsuits, boxing boots, camping gear and tweed suiting. It was an eclectic mix or, as the show notes said, a collection with “intrinsic strangeness”.
Dries Van Noten’s show is always a favourite of the arty-inclined fashion crowd. Huge photogenic bouquets of flowers frozen in ice, made by artist Makoto Azuma, dotted the catwalk. The show delivered clothes that would fit in at the crowds at London’s Frieze art fair. There were jet-beaded dresses and coats, chrysanthemum prints and wide coats with graphic prints akin to a De Kooning painting. A finale to an a capella of Madonna’s song Frozen was a fitting oddity that ensured Van Noten’s place in the art camp.
America’s streets are full of what the fashion industry labels “plus-sized women” – far more than we previously thought. Thanks to a new study, we now know that the average woman is around a size 20. Not, as previously believed, a size 14. That means that the disconnect between the clothes in store windows and the bodies of women walking past them is greater than we had ever assumed.
Despite this, major fashion brands still refuse to accept the bodies of their customers. The only fashion brands that want to acknowledge the size of the newly minted “average woman” are plus-size brands, which are marginalized in the market, as if they catered to a fringe and not, in fact, everyday Americans.
Designers still opt to create artificial cut-off points in their line, sizes beyond which they refuse to accommodate. That’s because they know that size, much like a specific brand, is aspirational. It plays on the insecurity of the audience to present an ultra-thin model wearing a high-end brand. It’s not enough for the audience to say, “Wow, that looks incredible on her.” It is intended to make the audience say, “I want to be her.”
With that desire comes the desperation of drastic weight loss efforts, starvation tactics, rumors of torturous workout regimens from renowned models, and the embarrassing stories of those who try to emulate them to no avail. Because the healthy path toward weight loss isn’t sexy or doesn’t result in “10 pounds lost in 7 days”, it’s never the path chosen. As a result, we so rarely see successful permanent weight loss.
This is the cycle that designers send us into – coveting everything about a woman walking down the runway, tormenting ourselves to try to be like her and then shaming ourselves for failing miserably.
Thankfully, there is a new crop of designers who recognize not only the fashion needs of the average woman, but the emotional needs, as well. The fashion label Lane Bryant, for example, has eagerly picked up the slack. Their ad campaign No Angel, which featured women with a variety of body shapes, was a nod to the difference between the average woman and Victoria’s Secret’s Angel models.
Designers such as Monif C and Whitney Mero encourage women to celebrate the gloriousness of a curvy body, no matter where their curves may be. And activewear brands such as Rainbeau Curves and Lola Getts Active are providing the support of reliable activewear while also encouraging their customers in positive, shame-free ways.
The fashion industry is ignoring the needs of the average woman because they’ve operated, for far too long, on the assumption that the average woman didn’t want to be average – she wanted to be a remarkable catwalk-ing beauty.
What they didn’t expect was the number of brands who would swoop in and show the everyday woman that her average body is beautiful, even if only a different kind. Her average body is and can be remarkable. And, if the fashion industry can’t figure that out, they’ll be left in the dust.
The two most memorable shows of London fashion week had a common theme: memories. Ryan Lo’s fantasia collection of clothes (ruffles and balloon trousers in sweet-shop colours) recalled Pierrot. The rainbow wave was helped along by a triple whammy of music: A Whole New World from Aladdin, Immortality by Céline Dion and Walk Like an Egyptian by the Bangles.
While in a mise-en-scène that included an unmade bed and a girl cutting her own hair in a mirror, Ashley Williams’s collection was a what’s what of a teenager’s wardrobe: a baseball jacket, hoodies, dungarees and Star Trek-ish sunglasses. As with Lo’s show, the music – Kate Bush’s Under the Ivy, Kirsty MacColl’s A New England – suggested the emotional terrain and introspection of the adolescent years. Both collections followed the trend for “now-stalgia”, the idea of using a patchwork quilt of memories to make something current. It’s big in 2016, from Stranger Things to Drake’s love of the Cheesecake Factory.
In fashion terms, it is a very now phenomenon, from the mood-board to the catwalk. There is Gigi Hadid’s collaboration with Tommy Hilfiger that drew on 90s sportswear trends and the silhouette of Aaliyah, Vetements and Kim Kardashian’s re-configuring of the Juicy Couture tracksuit, and Christopher Kane’s inclusion of Crocs on the catwalk at London fashion week.
Nostalgia not only provides us with a safety net at a time of political or economic instability, it allows us to engage with the stylistic elements at a distance. On the internet, the past is presented as a smörgåsbord of interconnected trends and pop culture moments, spliced with a new twist. Instead of a wide range of sub-cultures roaming around organically, styles and tastes are dictated by Tumblrs and Instagram accounts. The pre-internet age has been fetishised. Buzzfeed (45 things from your 90s childhood you probably forgot about) and Instagrams (such as Every outfit on Sex & the City) illustrate our bottomless need to revisit and re-evaluate visual signifiers from our childhoods.
This interconnectivity, where nostalgia meets current fashion trends, can be seen whenever an Instagirl celebrity, such as Hadid or Kylie or Kendall Jenner, wears items rooted in the not-so-distant past: round sunglasses, chokers or distressed denim. Or when labels such as Hood By Air and Gosha Rubchinskiy pay tribute to retro sportswear, and new iterations of jean shape and colour reference the past. As our reference points bounce from the fashions in Clueless to My So-Called Life, now-stalgia exists with less ironic distance and more joy as the architecture for fashion now.
The founder of French Connection has shrugged off pressure from an activist shareholder to surrender his dual role as chairman and chief executive of the retailer as it continues to nurse heavy losses.
The company’s chief operating officer, Neil Williams, said any change to Stephen Marks’s responsibilities would run the risk of derailing its turnaround plan. “Stephen is inherent to this business,” he said. “We are in the middle of a turnaround and it would be destabilising to change the situation.”
Williams’s comments came as the retailer reported a pre-tax loss of £7.9m for the six months to 31 July, which was unchanged from a year ago. Sales at established stores were up 6.5% but trading at its wholesale arm was dire, with sales tumbling nearly 17% as department store buyers stocked up cautiously after its ranges sold badly in 2015. French Connection closed five loss-making stores during the period and plans to shut another five in the coming months.
Gatemore Capital Management, a US hedge fund that has built an 8% stake, thinks better corporate governance would improve French Connection’s financial performance. The retailer is in its fifth loss-making year and Liad Meidar, a managing partner at Gatemore, said it was time to “rip off the Band-Aid”.
Meidar believes the company should shut nearly half its stores over the next two years, leaving it with about 30. “The turnaround plan has not gone far enough,” he said. “Corporate governance is a continuing issue and this needs to be improved across all levels if we are to see meaningful change.”
Marks, who founded the business in 1972, owns a near 42% stake. Williams said Gatemore’s concerns had not been echoed by other shareholders.
The analyst Sarah Johns of Verdict Retail said French Connection was struggling to compete with the likes of H&M, Zara, Topshop and Asos: “The FCUK branding on selected lines is outdated, collections can be hit-and-miss while upper-mid and premium price points make it difficult for shoppers to justify paying full price when similar styles and quality can be found for less elsewhere.”
Johns said store sales only looked stronger because it had closed loss-making outlets and its performance a year ago had been so dire. She also pointed to its dwindling cash reserves, which have fallen from £22.3m three years ago to £7.7m.
“The business requires a serious cash injection to prevent further periods of tumbling top-line sales, profit losses and disappointed shareholders,” she said. “A revised strategy which prioritises investment in product lines, product cost reduction and brand differentiation is desperately needed.”
Stephen Marks is refusing to sit down with an activist investor that wants him to surrender his dual role as chairman and chief executive of the struggling fashion chain French Connection.
The retailer will update the City on first-half trading on Tuesday and Gatemore Capital Management, the US hedge fund that has built an 8% stake, is seeking a meeting with the full board to discuss ideas to improve its financial performance that were set out in a letter to the company in July.
Liad Meidar, a Gatemore managing partner, said it wanted the audience to discuss a turnaround plan under which the long-serving non-executive directors Dean Murray and Claire Kent would be replaced.
The pair have been on the board since 2008 so will soon lose their status as “independent” under the UK corporate governance code. Gatemore also wants the retailer to accelerate plans to shut unprofitable stores and to “move on” from using its well-known FCUK label.
“He [Marks] is not really willing to have an open conversation about why French Connection is underperforming,” said Meidar, who added that a wider shareholder base was unifying around its ideas. “You have a 41% shareholder who is running this business at his leisure, not for for the benefit of all shareholders.”
French Connection confirmed that Marks, who founded the business in 1972, would not be meeting any shareholders as part of the interim results roadshow, with briefings to be handled by other members of its executive team, which includes the new finance director, Lee Williams, who joined from its online rival Asos.
French Connection, which also owns the brands Toast and Great Plains, made a £3.5m loss in 2015. The shares are changing hands for 40.75p, giving the retailer a market capitalisation of £40m.
Marks has mapped out a plan for a return to the brand’s previous glories that involves shutting unprofitable stores and improving its ranges. The company has also enlisted the highly regarded fashion executive Christos Angelides, who has worked with Next and Abercrombie & Fitch, as an independent non-executive director. At its full-year results in March, Marks insisted the business was moving in the right direction.
Its recent collections have been well received by the fashion press, but any progress is against a backdrop of tough trading, with Next and John Lewis both reporting a fall in first-half profits last week.
Sports Direct boss Mike Ashley once promised to finish off JD Sports, but now finds himself being trounced by his rival.
JD Sports, the self-styled King of Trainers, is not only valued at a cool £1.1bn more than the Newcastle United owner’s chain, but last week revealed its sales and profits growth were a well-shod leap ahead of the rest of the UK fashion market.
While other clothing retailers have spent the last two years moaning about unsuitable weather and claiming that shoppers are more interested in holidays and gadgets than the latest fashion, JD has powered on. Sales at stores open more than a year rose 10% in the six months to the end of July.
Even executive chairman Peter Cowgill sounded surprised by the group’s 66% rise in underlying profits, revealed on Tuesday, saying they “exceeded reasonable expectations.”
But the performance should not be a shock. The sportswear market is generally less weather-dependent than the rest of the clothing market and JD is at the centre of the catwalk-led “athleisure” trend for sportswear as fashion.
Major brands such as Nike and Adidas have been expanding their ranges to include the kind of sportswear meant to be worn outside the gym. Celebrities such as Beyoncé – whose athleisure line, Ivy Park, is sold in JD – have given a boost to the trend, which is drawing more women into sport stores.
Sales in JD’s womenswear are soaring, having traditionally made up less than 30% of the chain’s sales compared with 60% for the whole UK clothing market.
Of course trends come and go, so there is some debate whether JD’s mini-boom will drop off once young people move on to something new. Cowgill argues: “We can never predict the future but I don’t think it’s a trend. I think it’s a culture, a lifestyle situation. Not long ago you couldn’t go into a bar with trainers on: now it is more acceptable.”
And it’s not only bars. Sales of trainers are rising around the world as casualwear becomes the norm in offices as well as at social events.
Richard Hyman, the veteran independent retail analyst, says: “Trainers have become shoes and the key beneficiary has not been traditional footwear retailers or apparel retailers with footwear departments. This market is highly branded, whereas mainstream fashion is very own-label. People want the credibility of a brand and JD has built a business on that.”
Of course, Sports Direct has also benefited from that trend, but to a lesser extent, as JD has a much stronger relationships with the key brands. This gives it access to more exclusive products, and launches of sought-after new designs.
Cowgill says fostering those relationships through investment in the look and ambience of stores has been key to keeping such brands on board.
Kate Calvert, an analyst at JD’s house broker Investec, says: “Sports Direct has had quite a turbulent time with the two major suppliers, Nike and Adidas – they’re always falling in and out of love with each other.” In that environment, JD has been able to get access to premium products at premium prices, insulating it from some of the wider market deflation.
Sports Direct has cottoned on to this and is trying to woo the brands back with investment in stores, alongside efforts to tackle the employment and governance practices that have drawn so much bad publicity. Fiona Paton, an analyst at Verdict Retail, says: “[JD] has benefited from Sports Direct’s mass of bad publicity and the distractions that has caused its senior management.
“However, this will not go on indefinitely, and Sports Direct has announced plans to target more premium brands with investment in its Flannels fascia, so JD Sports is likely to face tougher competition in the near future.”
Cowgill counters: “All our competitors worry us. We’ve got to keep an eye on various parts of the market.” He adds with a smile about Sports Direct: “It remains to be seen if they get their act together. We try to avoid being in direct competition. We see the market as huge enough for the two of us.”
That market increasingly includes Europe, where JD is expanding its main chain in France, Spain, the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Sweden, Denmark and, most recently, Portugal. It also owns Sprinter in Spain, Chausport in France and has taken its trendy Size? footwear chain into five countries over the channel. Further afield, it has bought outlets in Malaysia and Australia. Revenues are up 38% in Europe and 14% elsewhere, although the profitability of these operations is not yet clear.
Last week, Cowgill was in a bullish mood. “We never rest on our laurels and we are gutted if there’s even a day when our numbers are negative. We drive as hard as we possibly can.” It could be a speech from a professional sportsman.
As thousands of people flocked to New York this past week for New York Fashion Week, the great cycle began again. Clothes worn by the models will make their way from the runway to fashion desks and designer stores and then to people’s closets. Some of the most expensive pieces will make it to consignment stores offering bargain hunters the chance to snap up high-end clothing at affordable prices.
Consignment stores that let fashionistas trade their clothes for cash have been with us for decades but now there’s a growing appetite for secondhand clothes stores specializing in high-end labels. Everyone seems to benefit. The rich get to offload last season’s looks and the rest of us get to shop the closets of the in-crowd and the 1%.
Department stores have experienced a drop in sales and stores like Sears, Gap, Macy’s and Kate Spade have all announced that they were shuttering shops across the country but resale shops, on the other hand, enjoyed an increase in sales in 2015.
The resale industry – including not-for-profit stores like thrift shops – grew at about 7% a year in 2014 and 2015, according to the National Association of Resale Professionals (Narts). It also saw an increase in inventory with more people looking to make money off of their clothes, according to Narts.
Consignment stores are winning because they have a smart business model, said Tammy Fluhr-Gates, whose family founded and still owns Michael’s on Madison Avenue in New York. Michael’s opened in 1954 and was among the first consignment stores in the US.
“We don’t have much overhead because we don’t own the merchandise. We don’t have to project six months out for what the trend will be and can change on a dime,” Fluhr-Gates explained. Consignment stores can adjust prices according to whatever is happening that day – whether there are more people buying or selling. “There are few businesses where everyone feels like they are winning.”
Consignors are winning because they are able to monetize a piece of clothing they no longer need or want. Shoppers win because they get a piece of high-end clothing at a discount. The consignment store wins by “bringing them together”.
On average, Americans selling their clothes get from 40% to 60% of the selling price. The rest goes to the store.
About 80% of clothes taken in by Michael’s are sold within the first 30 days, said Fluhr-Gates. “We price to sell,” she said, adding that consignors should think of clothes as real estate. If you overprice your house, you run the risk of it sitting on the market for too long. “The same kind of phenomenon can happen in the consignment store.”
Elizabeth Murphy, who along with her husband Ben Malik Karambiri owns three high-end consignment stores called Eleven – one in Manhattan and two in Brooklyn – loves the hustle of consigning.
“It’s always something new every day whether it’s the consignor being crazy or irate and fighting with us about what she wants for price point or someone coming in and buying $3,000 worth of old Givenchy T-shirts because they collect them,” she said.
Haggling over prices does not faze Murphy – there is a specific formula to pricing items at a consignment shop.
“Anything that’s not Chanel or Hermès immediately depreciates by half the minute you walk out of the store. You bought a Prada dress for $500 from Prada on Fifth Avenue. You walk out the store, it is now worth $250. If the tags are on it, you have never worn it, it’s never been photographed, you’ve never washed it, I am going to keep it at $250. After it sells, you can have a half of that. That’s a 50-50 split. That’s consignment. We are glorified eBay essentially with the different percentage,” she said. “If it has been washed, loved, abused, you were photographed in it, it has been worn 10 times or it is a mass-produced item, I cut the price in half again so now that $500 dress is at $125. That’s my price point. That’s how I decided prices.”
There is a reason why items from Chanel and Hermès sell for more: they are unique and the collections are limited.
“I tell people the clothes don’t have the best retail value because they are so mass produced. I mean Prada is in 30 states in the United States and 75 countries. This is glorified Zara at that point,” said Murphy. “When something becomes mass produced, it loses its value just like any antique or a car. Mass production kills value.”
Owners of consignment stores agree that the idea of selling and buying used clothes has become more mainstream over the years. For one, there was a rise in websites like eBay that enabled people to sell their possessions. Then came the recession. As many Americans found themselves without a raise for years or taking lower-paid jobs to make ends meet, making money off clothes one already owned, as well as buying slightly used clothes at a discount, became more and more appealing.
“We have seen everything. We have seen a young girl who got a handbag for Christmas – she wore it, loved it, abused it – and now wants to sell it and make some rent money. We have seen a woman from Connecticut sell us four Birkin bags from the back of her car in a parking lot because she is getting a divorce and has to make money. She is selling them under the fly from her husband,” said Murphy. “Nine times out of 10, [consignors are] someone who just needs straight money.”
Anyone doubting the widespread acceptance and popularity of shopping for used clothes need look no further than Macklemore’s 2013 hit Thrift Shop. The song sat on top of Billboard’s top 100 list for weeks. It was subsequently deemed “the most successful track in the 25 years of Billboard’s Hot Rap Songs chart”.
The $20 bill burning a hole in Macklemore’s pocket, however, would do him no good at any of the high-end consignment stores in New York, where price tags can range from a few hundred dollars to a couple of thousand.
Despite the prices, the market has gotten slightly younger over the years, said Greg Selig, owner of Encounters. Encounters was the first high-end consignment store to open in the US in 1954. Selig’s mother was a salesperson there before she and her husband bought the store in 1981.
“I would say it’s a young girl just out of college, she wants her first job, she wants her first fancy handbag. It’s the woman between 22 and 40 – they want to keep up with the Joneses. They want to look good. They are practical shoppers. It’s people who are trendsetters. It’s people who go: I can’t go to Macy’s. I can’t go to Bloomingdale’s. I can’t wear the same thing my friend does. I have to wear something super unique. I want to stand out,” Murphy agreed.
While the buyers might have gotten younger, consignors remain slightly older.
“The younger audience is not going to be spending $1,200 on a [new] bag in terms of an accessible income. The customer base has gotten younger but in terms of the consignment base – the people selling the goods – there’s only so young you can get in terms of who has accessible income” to buy the items often seen on the runway, Selig explained.
Fluhr-Gates recalled once telling another reporter that the most expensive item sold at Michael’s was an $18,000 handbag. Who would buy that? Someone rich, she said.
“People who are purchasing from us have the ability to walk down to Hermès and buy it from Hermès directly, but they understand the value of consignment because they can get it for a few thousand dollars less, which is not chump change,” she said. “Also, because they recognize that recycling has a benefit and that value can also reside in the thrill of the hunt. There is also a psychological aspect to shopping consignment. And you never know what you are going to find.”
The fashion industry is calling on the government to ensure the UK stays in the single market after Brexit as hundreds of international buyers arrive for London Fashion Week.
Caroline Rush, chief executive of the British Fashion Council which organises the UK twice-yearly festival of catwalk shows and exhibitions, said 70% of the British fashion industry’s £8.5bn exports go to Europe. “Continuing to have access to the single market is going to be vitally important to us.”
Rush said that the industry was also keen to ensure that young designers, who have helped build London Fashion Week’s reputation as the home of new talent, were still able to come to the UK to study and work.
She added that there also needed to be discussions about how the UK would replace EU funding which is supporting the revival of British clothing factories and training.
“We need to ensure that our changing relationship with the EU will not impact on the creativity of London, our access to new talent overseas or the ongoing education and training programmes we support,” Rush said.
Over the next five days 83 designer shows will appear on the London Fashion Week schedule and a further 150 designers will showcase their latest collections in showrooms, generating an estimated £100m of orders from the international audience of press and buyers from 58 countries.
Rush said the fashion industry had not wanted to exit the European Union but “we have to put a brave face on it” and look for opportunities.
She said there had been a bounce in luxury fashion sales following the European referendum vote as tourists took advantage of the drop in the value of the pound against the euro and the dollar.
Bag designer Anya Hindmarch agreed: “The fashion industry was a remain voter and it was a bit of a shock at first but then you regroup and people are saying there are lots of positives.
“A big advantage is obviously we are 10% cheaper [after the fall in the value of the pound against the dollar and the euro]. Tourists are coming to London and buying.”
We appreciate Hadley Freeman’s point (Don’t blame the fashion world for the cult of skinny, Weekend, 10 September) that eating disorders are multifactorial, unattributed to any single cause. However, we disagree that the fashion industry, and its media representations, don’t play a role.
The industry’s promotion of extreme thinness is a major sociocultural pressure that increases eating disorder risk. Furthermore, these pressures are harmful to models, who too often must put their health at risk to keep their job. Legislation that can change this thin-ideal saturated environment has a high potential to decrease the incidence of disordered eating behaviours.
The Women’s Equality party’s proposal argues for legislation aiming to increase size and shape diversity in fashion, including through larger sample sizes. Such legislation can be effective when end-users are involved and when enforcement is possible in practice and through the allocation of resources. In addition, providing youth with tools to resist appearance pressures is critical to decreasing rates of disordered eating. The WEP’s additional focus on including media literacy in curriculums would address this. A number of effective, evidence-based media literacy programmes are freely available for schools.
Limiting the impact of the thin ideal can only happen through concerted efforts to decrease these pressures and simultaneously help young people resist them. The WEP’s proposal outlines such a plan and may pave the way to healthier working conditions for models and positive body image for the greater public. 
Rachel Rodgers Associate professor, Department of Applied Psychology, Northeastern University, USA, Professor S Bryn Austin Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health and Harvard Medical School, Sara Ziff Founding director, Model Alliance, Áine Campbell, Madeline Hill, Meredith Hattam Co-directors, Model Alliance
Two years ago, at a Democratic fundraiser in Seattle, President Obama spoke of “the sense that around the world the old order isn’t holding and we’re not quite yet to where we need to be in terms of a new order that’s based on a different set of principles”. To be clear, he was talking about Ukraine and Syria and Israel, not about fashion week. But as Coco Chanel so wisely remarked, fashion reflects the world we live in, and Obama’s words are as true of the current state of the fashion industry as they are of international relations. In fashion as in politics, the system is outmoded, the establishment is at breaking point, the mood is fractious and unrest is in the air.
This sounds a grandiose starting point from which to debate See Now, Buy Now, the trend to ditch fashion’s six-month lead time and synchronise catwalk shows with store deliveries. But See Now, Buy Now is a crucial tipping point, at which the impact of technology, globalisation and democratisation on the fashion industry is felt not just by buyers in the retail industry sense, but by buyers in the me-and-you-on-a-Saturday-afternoon sense.
On Monday evening, when Burberry stage their London fashion week catwalk show, it will break with a format that has held for more than half a century. This will not be a trailer for clothes that will go on sale six months later, but a starting gun for a collection designed to be bought, and worn, immediately. Paul Smith, Tom Ford and Tommy Hilfiger, among others, are adopting the same model.
Christopher Bailey, who as president and chief creative officer at Burberry is at the forefront of the change, calls See Now, Buy Now “an ongoing evolution”. The word evolution is interesting, because when the world is in a period of rapid change, Darwin’s process of natural selection goes into fast forward. Take the case of the peppered moth in the Industrial Revolution. At the beginning of the 19th century, the peppered moth was light with dark spots. When the atmosphere in London became filled with soot, the white trees became darker and the lighter coloured moths were more visible to birds. Within a few decades, the moths had evolved to become darker. In the same way, in our era of technological revolution, instant gratification has become the new normal and slow-moving fashion houses look suddenly vulnerable.
The messy and confusing phase the fashion industry finds itself in while See Now, Buy Now is in this experimental period need not concern us here. In the end, the success or failure of the concept will be determined not by whether it is convenient for those in the industry, but whether it delivers for the consumer. At first glance, this seems a no-brainer. You see a look you want on the catwalk, you can buy it straight away. Yay! Right? Except it’s a bit more complicated than that. The grand, sweeping narrative of fashion – the lyrical view, which says that we crave full skirts in times when we yearn for old-fashioned values, or that hemlines get higher when economic confidence goes up – has traditionally been a folktale woven together in the months after the catwalk season, and presented as a delicious, page-turning big reveal in magazines and shop windows at the moment those collections go on sale. If fashion is reduced to clicking-to-buy on a new pair of boots, will this romantic element be lost?
Not necessarily. The runaway success of the box set proves that storytelling can survive – even thrive – when an audience consume episodes at their own pace. Primetime slots no longer have the significance they once did, but TV is in a golden age nonetheless. The same could prove true of fashion and catwalk shows.
“I feel like the idea of seasonal trends is antiquated already,” says Imran Amed, founder of Business of Fashion. The two-season model, designed around “autumn/winter” and “spring/summer” as two opposite wardrobes is outmoded in an era of air conditioning, of mass-market long-haul travel, and of a global economy. “When we are designing a collection, we are not just creating it for people who live in one climate, one culture, or one way of thinking,” Bailey says. Or as Zach Duane, CEO of Victoria Beckham, puts it, “Whose autumn/winter are we talking about, anyway?”
The twice-yearly trend roundup is dead, and in its place has arrived an ongoing “digital campfire” where stories are shared, embellished, made into myth. Social media has been key to this – “The reader has got used to seeing new trends every single day,” says Lorraine Candy, Elle’s editor-in-chief – but the rising influence of menswear within fashion has had an impact, too. Womenswear and menswear are increasingly shown together on the catwalk, with the result that an industry that was once divided into a girls’ school and a boys’ school, and only met at parties, is now integrated. This has brought elements of menswear culture into mainstream fashion, and in particular a more drip-feed notion of trend. As Fiona Firth, buying director at Mr Porter, says, “Menswear is an evolution from one season to the next, so the trends follow suit, and do not change dramatically seasonally.”
See Now, Buy Now is “absolutely logical” for the huge brands who can afford to make a big noise with their shows, Duane says. “If you are spending millions of pounds promoting a collection, why on earth would you be doing that six months before it hits store, when you could drive desire at the moment it goes on sale?” But if those brands can utilise the new model to amplify their voice, will that be at the expense of smaller labels, whose point of view will get drowned out? And if fashion becomes more commercial at the expense of experimentation – is the consumer not, in the end, the loser? If catwalk collections are a direct showcase of, rather than a teaser for, the clothes that will go in store, then it seems logical that the catwalks will be more wearable. “I am the first to raise my hand and say I don’t want to watch a bunch of trenchcoats and T-shirts on the runway,” Amed says. “What’s the point? But smart brands will figure out a way to make the show interesting to the audience.” Candy sees a positive in catwalk shows becoming truer representations of the clothes on the shopfloor. “We always want to shoot things that will actually be in the shops, and in this system that can be a struggle. So actually, I think it’s quite a good thing.”
The most immediate impact of See Now, Buy Now on fashion will be on what you see rather than on what you buy. The details of timing are, in the big picture, less significant than the fact that the catwalk-as-trade-show is almost defunct; the modern catwalk show is an event for the wider fashion audience. This can be literal – as at Givenchy’s S/S 16 New York show, where 800 seats were reserved for the public – or virtual, as in the Chanel shows’ visual spectaculars which are instantly magnified through Instagram to reach an audience of millions. The model that triumphs will be the one that best pleases the global fashion audience. The industry is in upheaval, but the oldest adage in business still holds. The customer is always right.
It would be possible to make a case for the boilersuit – from Ghostbusters to the hordes of Glastonbury – as the item of the decade. At New York fashion week on Monday evening, there was more fuel to the fire: the finale of the DKNY show featured about 40 models in boiler suits. Case closed.
This was the first show for DKNY since it was bought by production company G-III for around £500m in July. And, judging by the venue (New York’s favourite 21st-century tourist attraction, the High Line), the 9pm start and millennial-focused front row, change was in the air.
It came courtesy of Dao-Yi Chow and Maxwell Osborne, who made their name designing for their brand Public School. This is their third collection for DKNY and, like the previous outings, New York was the inspiration for a collection that attempted to create a uniform for young, city-dwelling professionals. “In the future, what will define New York style?” read the show notes. “People talk a lot about our past, but we like to think about what’s next.” That means, presumably, boilersuits.
The concept of clothes for New Yorkers paid homage to Karan’s original idea – easy clothes for busy professional women. Other designs on Monday evening elaborated on this idea, and brought it up to date with sporty details and a colour palate of navy, khaki and taupe. See: slouchy hoodies, duster jackets, sharp trim jacket, and sports bras with subtle DKNY branding on the midriff. Karan, sitting in the front row, would have approved. Some pieces took the functional thing too far – long net coats with multiple pockets or plastic moulded shoes for example. But this is more a work in progress for a new era, as opposed to the finished article.
It was announced in July that LVMH had sold DKNY, originally bought in 2001, as part of Donna Karan International to US-based production company G-III. With this deal it became only the second ever brand to be sold by LVMH. G-III produces clothes for other American brands including Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger, so Karan’s label – another American classic – fits in well. “[Donna Karan International’s] lifestyle aesthetic resonates well with consumers throughout the world,” said Morris Goldfarb, chief executive of G-III, at the time.
As Goldfarb is no doubt aware, the brand’s reach is far from Karan’s heyday in the 80s and 90s. This can be seen in black-and-white through sales figures – Donna Karan International was running at a loss when it was bought by G-III. It is the job of these new designers, and new owners, to turn that around. This is the first step on that road.
Acid attack survivor Reshma Qureshi makes her catwalk debut on the opening day of New York Fashion Week on Thursday. She was invited to take part by FTL Moda, a fashion production company committed to challenging industry stereotypes of beauty. Wearing at full-length dress by Indian designer Archana Kochhar for her catwalk appearance, Reshma tells Reuters she wants victims of acid attacks to be viewed in the same light as anyone else. In India it is estimated that up to 1,000 acid attacks take place each year. Photograph: Mary Altaffer/AP
Two leading clean ocean advocacy groups have joined forces to stop tiny synthetic clothing fibers from polluting the world’s waterways and poisoning the food chain.
Plastic Soup Foundation (PSF), a Dutch nonprofit, and New York-based Parley for the Oceans announced Tuesday a partnership to tackle the issue of microfiber pollution and to create a global alliance of companies, governments, NGOs and scientists. Microfibers – tiny, often synthetic threads shed from laundry, industrial clothing manufacturing and fishing nets – have been found in alarming numbers in recent studies of microplastic pollution.
“Microfibers pose a massive and complex threat,” said Cyrill Gutsch, founder of Parley for the Oceans, in a statement. “It’s all about funding, supporting and boosting new technologies… [and] the best way to achieve this is together.”
The partnership comes after PSF launched its Ocean Clean Wash campaign earlier this year to educate washing machine manufacturers, fashion brands, environmental organizations and the public about the problem. PSF says already 100 nonprofits and other organizations have signed on to support the campaign, including Greenpeace UK and Austria, Plastic Pollution Coalition and Fauna & Flora International.
A June study found that synthetic fleece jackets release, on average, 1.7 grams of microfibers each wash. These small fibers aren’t easily filtered out at local wastewater treatment plants. The study, funded by outdoor clothing company Patagonia, found that up to 40% of these small fibers land up in oceans, rivers and lakes, threatening wildlife and ultimately our food chain.
Synthetic fibers such as acrylic, polyester and nylon pose the most danger because they don’t disintegrate and disappear over time. Instead, they break down into smaller, increasingly toxic pieces, allowing them to be consumed by fish and other animals. These tiny fibers have the potential to build up and lead to a potentially poisonous accumulation of chemicals in larger species. A study from the University of Exeter found that crabs contaminated with microfibers ate less food and that the polypropylene plastic broke into smaller pieces when ingested, leading to a greater spread in the body – and consequently a greater threat to human health.
Clothing companies have been slow to lend their support to the issue, although that’s starting to change. Patagonia says it continues to fund research and provide grants to explore ways to reduce the release of microfibers into waterways. Dutch clothing brand G-Star Raw announced earlier this year it was supporting PSF to raise awareness among fashion and textile companies about the damage their clothing can pose to the environment and to public health. According to PSF, nearly 40 fashion brands have agreed to collaborate as part of the partnership with Parley. The brands involved will be announced during a Call to Action event early next year.
PSF and Parley will work with other organizations to launch a competition next year to encourage scientists, inventors and clothing makers to come up with ways to stop the release of microfibers in the wash. The winners will be announced in 2018, and will receive a cash prize to implement their ideas.
According to PSF and Parley, possible solutions to the issue include a mechanical filter in washing machines to catch tiny fibers, synthetic yarns and fabrics that don’t release fibers in the wash and environmentally safe coatings that prevent microfibers from releasing when rinsed.
In the small village of Bakipur in the east Indian state of West Bengal, Rajbhanu Khatun is famous. The 30-year-old has a knack for making silk, a skill that many women come to her to learn. “For the first two hours, you’ll be fine,” says Khatun, whose job involves removing silkworms’ cocoons from boiling water. “Then your fingers start to burn. The water is hot, 100 degrees, but I have to keep going.”
The silkworms spin cocoons for 90 days of the year, throughout which Khatun works day and night to maximise the amount of silk she can produce. “I start my day at 4am and work all day until after the sun sets. There are only five periods in the year when the season is right, and, during those days especially, I work very hard. It is difficult, but I like it very much,” she says.
Khatun’s earnings are important for the family, who rely on good harvests on their paddy farms for the rest of the year. “I earn around 500 rupees [£5] a day – that’s around 50,000 a year, which is a lot for the people here.
“I use the money to send my children to school, to feed my family. When the family is going through a difficult time, I can support them with my earnings. Sometimes I buy nice things for myself like earrings or bangles or dresses.”
Many women in Bakipur have taken Khatun’s lead and are running small-scale silk factories. “Almost all the homes in the village produce silk now,” she says.
In a small hut near her home, large straw trays are kept in the dark. Inside the trays, thousands of small black worms chew on mulberry leaves. “Now, they are very young,” says Khatun. “After a while, they’ll become bigger and white, and then they’ll start spinning cocoons.”
Khatun’s skills have won her accolades from the Central Sericultural Research and Training Institute in the nearby town of Berhampore, and women from the village often come to learn from her. “I am a teacher now. It takes a woman around five to six months to learn everything, but then she can make silk in her own home,” she says.
Khatun started weaving silk when she was a child. “I learned by watching. My parents and grandparents all used to do this work. A long time ago, our family would have made silk for princes. I learned by watching them.”
For centuries, the villages around Bakipur, in the district of Murshidabad, were famous for making some of the finest silks in the world. The nawabs who ruled Bengal and governed the fertile provinces of eastern India made Murshidabad their seat of power. They were patrons of the flourishing industry of high-quality silk, which was shipped around the globe. Silk weavers had a special place in society, and were even traded between India’s royal families as gifts or dowries.
When the British colonised India, the nobility fell from power, and demand for silk declined. Silk weavers were encouraged to switch to making cotton. In the past few decades, the Indian silk industry has suffered because of competition from China.
Now, a government-backed campaign is encouraging villagers to revive the craft. Government officials have toured villages in Murshidabad and Malda running silk-making courses. Villagers like Khatun can get certified, which allows them to buy tools at a subsidised rate. “It’s mostly women who do this work,” says Khatun. “The men work in the paddy fields, they find other jobs as tuk-tuk [auto-rickshaw] drivers or whatever. The men help, but it’s usually women. The women can do this work from their homes.”
As part of prime minister Narendra Modi’s Make in India campaign to boost local manufacturing, traditional silks are enjoying a small revival. India remains the world’s second largest producer of silk, employing more than 8 million workers, including handloom weavers, designers and retailers.
To support Modi’s campaign, fashion designers are using traditional fabrics and women in Bakipur have felt the impact. “A few years ago, it was harder to sell silk. Now, people are buying a lot of it. We still want to be paid more, but we’re happy to see that people are buying it,” says Muharram Shaikh, a relative of Khatun’s.
The women make traditional silk saris, or silk material that can be used in dresses. Each region is known for a specific quality of material, used in different types of saris and dresses.
Raw silk is sold to handloom weavers in the local markets, who turn the silk threads into fabric.
Though it is too early to judge whether silk production has improved the lives of workers in the silk villages, government figures show that production increased significantly. India churned out more than 28,000 tonnes of raw silk in 2014-15, up 8.4% on the previous year, according to the Ministry of Textile’s Central Silk Board.
However, despite their crucial role in the manufacturing process, few women are allowed outside their homes to buy or sell silk.
Chandan Roy, assistant professor and head of the economics department at Kaliyaganj College in West Bengal, says old attitudes to women’s work continue. “My work in this field explored that women workers are displaced by their male counterparts as the level of income generation rises and the working women in this sector are not empowered,” he says.
“More of the major decisions of the household as well as their business activities are being taken by their male counterpart.”
The Women’s Equality party is to launch an unprecedented campaign aimed at radically changing the way the fashion industry treats body size and shape.
Coinciding with London fashion week, which will run from 16-20 September, the initiative will call for an end to unrealistically small “sample sizes” – the sizes in which designers show their new creations – and demand a minimum body mass index (BMI) for models.
Sophie Walker, the WEP leader, plans to ask the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, to withdraw funding for next year’s fashion week if the campaign’s key demands are not in place by then. She will also ask Maria Miller, chair of the Women and Equalities Commission, to hold a public hearing in which fashion designers will be asked why their clothes are based on “an unattainable level of thinness in women”, which Walker believes is contributing to a crisis in public health with an economic impact of £1.3bn a year.
The campaign calls for models whose BMI is below 18.5 to be seen by a medical professional from an accredited list, who will judge whether they are well enough to be employed by a modelling agency. Similar legislation exists in France, Spain, Italy and Israel. Campaigners are also asking that fashion designers showing at LFW commit to including at least two sample sizes in every range, one of which must be a UK size 12 or above.
Additional proposals include fashion magazines committing to at least one piece in each issue featuring plus-size models. WEP is also demanding that body image awareness become a compulsory part of personal, social and health education, with a focus on media depictions of beauty and extra training for teachers.
Those backing the campaign include Caryn Franklin, the former presenter of The Clothes Show, who is now a professor of diversity in fashion at Kingston University, plus-size model Jada Sezer and model Rosie Nixon, who has spoken out against an industry that asked her to lose an unreasonable and unhealthy amount of weight in order that she get “down to the bone”.
WEP will also launch an interactive social media campaign, #NoSizeFitsAll, based on the statistic that one in five women cut the labels out of their clothes to conceal their size. A photoshoot will feature new designers Isatu Harrison and her line, Izelia, and Katie Pope of Pope London, both of whose work will be modelled by a diverse group of women.
Walker describes the initiative as a chance to “raise awareness of the body image issues experienced by women and girls, and to have a discussion about the significant and far-reaching impact of the fashion industry’s idolisation of a unique and very small size”.
A funny thing happens in fashion, which is that you are bombarded with information about new-season fashion trends without ever being told what it is you should actually wear. I can get to the end of a feature about “the new directions” and feel, if I am honest, none the wiser. OK, I should aim for Contemporary Polish or Fresh Sparkle but, um, what should I wear tomorrow?
This is not about fashion being deliberately obtuse. It is not even about fashion being accidentally obtuse by dint of Zoolanderish overuse of impressive-sounding words. (OK, OK, maybe a little bit of the latter.) It springs from good intentions: a well-intentioned recognition that fashion, these days, is as much about cult styling tricks and below-the-radar trends as it is about the new Prada catwalk. But the desire to appeal to the widest possible audience ends up miring fashion in bland, catch-all manifesto-speak that doesn’t mean anything. The phrase “modern tailoring” is to fashion’s September issues what “hard-working families” is to party conference season.
So I will do my best to get to the point. The look you are aiming for this autumn is a bit sporty, quite blunt, but a bit posh. Let’s break this down. Sportswear has dominated fashion for more than a year. But the sporty element of this season’s look is slightly different from six months ago. The perky athleisure vibe has turned less wholesome. This is the kind of sportswear that gets a cheeky McDonald’s on the way home from the pub, not the green-juice kind. It is a shiny pair of three-stripe Adidas tracksuit bottoms, or a crop top to give that demure midi-skirt a new look, or a half-zip sweatshirt under a blazer.
Next. Blunt sounds like exactly the kind of obtuse fashion directive I was bemoaning, right? It’s not a colour, or a hemline, or a print. But it is the reason why fashion types who have sworn by navy coats for the last five years are buying padded jackets and anoraks in analogue primaries. It is why trainers and flat shoes work with everything. It is why twiddly details are over and why breezily oversized is more on point than fussily fitted and why stark outlines, such as a vest dress over a polo neck, work. It is why French Girl Chic – which has existed as a kind of independent city-state within fashion for years, white jeans aloft from the flagpole – has gone for motorcycle-leather toughness this season. For all Gigi Hadid’s caramel-toned girl-next-door appeal, it is her cooler, less approachable looking sister, Bella, who you should be channelling.
Lastly, posh. This is important, because the sporty and blunt elements need glamour and attitude. Buy one thing in jersey or acrylic, one in velvet or satin. Wear enormous earrings with your padded jacket and let your tracksuit bottoms pool on the floor, with a Delevingne-like insouciance, like silk pyjamas . Oh, and buy the padded jacket now, before they sell out. Does that sound blunt? Good. This season, that’s a compliment.
Thanks to Balenciaga, the kind of jacket that your parents made you wear for a wet walk in the Lake District is now fashionable. Preferably make it an 80s school-jacket colour combination – blue and green, perhaps. However, to make sure it isn’t mistaken for Millets, wear it the fashion way – shrugged on to frame your shoulders rather than zipped up properly.
If stars such as Taylor Swift and Alicia Vikander have been wearing velvet in the summer, it hasn’t jumped the shark yet. On the catwalk at Valentino and Haider Ackermann, the cool girls’ take is a velvet blazer. It’s smart, a bit retro in a Jimi Hendrix way and – bonus! – distinctly strokeable.
Sure, there’s Miu Miu and Gucci on the catwalk but the furry-shoes prize still goes to Rihanna and her Puma line, Fenty. Her furry sliders – complete with stamped Puma logo – are ridiculous enough to bring the lols that footwear requires this season, but also have that Rihanna-patented loungey feel. Accessorise with a glass of wine and satin robe for the full look.
Anne-France Dautheville, Chloé’s muse this season, was a photographer who travelled around the Middle East on a motorbike in the 70s. Being Parisian, however, she needed some glamour in her holdall, and that came in the blouse. Chloé’s collection, therefore, had lots of frilly blouses, and these are the kind you need this season. The only rule? The more OTT the better.
If Michelle Obama’s blue dress at the Democratic convention kept things simple, her earrings – bold and graphic – were a fashion-friendly touch. It’s all about the statement earring right now, from the cluster of diamanté on ears at Saint Laurent to the mismatched designs at Loewe. Think of your ears as tiny galleries for abstract art and you’re on the right track.
The hoodie is the signature item of Vetements – the label that leads where fashion follows. As such, there is a surfeit of hoodies this season. Cropped ones, like this from Topshop, have a Kendall Jenner show-your-stomach look but oversized works too. Just be sure to keep the hood up for alpha in-the-know touch.
Keep reading – this isn’t the trench you know. In the hands of Phoebe Philo at Celine, AW16’s trench is less the tired style cliche thrown over suits for the commute home, and more slacker. Wear open, with sandals, to really fashion things up. Turning practical things unpractical is a particular fashion talent.
Call it lampshading if you want, but wearing a short dress/T-shirt/jumper with over-the-knee boots is definitely a thing. The baggy top is crucial. As the likes of Gigi Hadid, the Kardashians and indeed North West have all proved in the past, the slouchy top is what updates this look from Shania Twain video to 2016. Take note, Fergie.
Campaigners claim millions of shoppers are being led to believe the expensive shoes they buy in high-street stores are made in Germany and Italy – when many are actually made by workers on poverty wages in eastern European sweatshops.
The scandal is exposed in a damning investigation into the European shoe industry, which details illegal wages and shocking working conditions in factories turning out footwear for the UK market.
The investigation claims some big brands appear to be using a legal loophole, stamping their products with “Made in Italy” or “Made in Germany” to suggest they are high quality, when they have actually been made by poverty-stricken eastern European workers. The investigation found that footwear workers in Albania were earning as little as 49p an hour including overtime – which is an illegal rate even in such a poor country.
Workers in Macedonia, where the hourly wage was as low as 64p, described being taken to hospital in wheelbarrows after fainting in freezing factories where they had to work with strong chemicals. “If the employer needs to complete, let’s say, an order of 9,000 pairs of shoes, he will put 90 pairs on the belt and even if you want to die, you have to finish it,” a worker told researchers compiling the report, entitled Labour on a Shoestring.
It alleges that one Macedonian factory, which produced Geox shoes, was paying illegally low wages of €131 (£113) a month, with overtime. The legal minimum is €145 before overtime.
Geox shoes are available in the UK through John Lewis and House of Fraser, among other retailers. Geox did not respond to requests for comment.
Manufacturers are able to take advantage of an obscure European loophole known as the outward processing trade (OPT) scheme. Under the rules, companies cut parts for the shoes in one country before exporting them to a low-wage economy where they are assembled and sewn. They are then imported back to the original country, duty free. The finished shoes can then be labelled as being made in the original country.
The report, compiled by researchers from several European rights groups, is based on interviews with 179 workers in 12 factories. It condemns OPT as “a dead-end scheme for workers, national economies and businesses” and describes it as “an economic and social road to ruin”.
Researchers found that the factories produced shoes for brands including Zara, Lowa, Deichmann, Ara, Geox, Bata and Leder & Schuh AG and subsidiaries of CCC Shoes & Bags in Poland and Rieker and Gabor in Slovakia.
Bata did not address the allegations directly but welcomed the report, which it said had provided “interesting insights in the generally under-reported working conditions in eastern Europe”. The company said it expected its suppliers to comply with local laws.
The report looked at production in six low-wage European countries: Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, Poland, Romania and Slovakia. One in three of the Albanian workers questioned were paid less than the legal minimum wage of £121 a month, even with overtime and bonuses. The report indicated that women were generally worse off. Albanian workers reported having to work on up to 60 pairs of shoes a day.
Female workers in Romania said their husbands had to find low-paid seasonal work in the west to be able to afford wood to burn for heating during the winter. One man said: “Both my wife and I work in this factory. We are glad we could find work, but cannot imagine raising children on two factory wages. Our parents and relatives cannot support us, so we depend on this miserable wage. We wanted to move from the village to the city for a better life, but cannot afford to pay city rent from our salaries.”
Another worker, Krisztina, said her family had to keep livestock to feed themselves. “We have a garden and some animals. If I had to buy meat, like chicken breast from the shop, I would not be able to afford it. So, we must also take care of our animals every day because they are some of the only food we can afford.”
About 24 billion pairs of shoes are produced worldwide every year, including about 729 million made in Europe. But prices for European shoes are higher: an average Italian pair exports for £39, while an average Chinese pair exports for £3.
In a Macedonian factory supplying the Geox, Deichmann and Bata brands, workers said they were expected to use strong chemicals and complained of rheumatism, back pain, allergies and respiratory problems. They said their skin was often exposed to harmful chemicals because wearing gloves meant lower productivity and even lower wages.
Deichmann said it was not aware of issues with the factory, but was conducting its own investigation and would take any action necessary.
According to the report many workers complained of sweltering conditions in summer and freezing factories in winter. “My hands are freezing, I’m shivering all over and the door to the hall is open all the time,” one worker said. “If I get sick at work and if I have a car, somebody will take me to the hospital. But if I don’t have a car, then I will be taken in a wheelbarrow,” said another.
“In the summer, the heat is unbearable so we have had the ambulance here six times this year because co-workers had heat stroke,” said one Slovak worker.
Dorel Mituletum, deputy mayor of Calafat in Romania, was also interviewed for the report and said of the factory workers: “The poor things drop like flies.”
One Romanian worker said that when three women were overcome by the heat at their factory her Italian supervisor joked that “he would have to improvise a cemetery in the back yard if the women continued to faint”.
Anna McMullen, from Labour Behind the Label, a UK-based workers’ rights group involved in the report, said consumers needed to be told the truth about where their shoes come from. “The clever ruse of shipping shoe parts out to low-wage countries to the east of Europe for assembly and glueing, before returning shoes for labelling as ‘made in Europe’, is duping consumers into thinking their products are made with dignity,” she said.
“In fact, we now know that workers in Albania and Macedonia are being paid wages so low that they cannot feed their families – so much so that the gap between the minimum and living wage is greater than in China. These out-sourcing methods used by some brands are turning mass profits on the back of worker poverty.”
McMullen said consumers tended to associate sweatshops with Asia, but the reality was that they existed much closer to home. “The need for fast fashion is bringing shoe production closer to home, and with it comes wage competition with Asia that mirrors, if not tops, the exploitation that we see elsewhere in global supply chains.
“Workers are earning less than a quarter of the wage that they need to live with dignity, despite toiling massively long hours to deliver stressful piece-rate targets. ‘Made in Europe’ no longer means ‘made with dignity’.”
The groups behind the report want manufacturers to be more transparent about where they make shoes that are on sale on UK high streets – and about wages and working conditions.
McMullen added: “Today, we are calling out brands that hide exploitation behind labels that con consumers. Brands have a duty to make sure human rights are delivered for people who make their shoes. Being honest about where that is, is one of the first steps.”
Separately, one company not named in the report, Adidas, was invited by the researchers to comment on its findings and backed the campaigners’ calls for improved working conditions. “We do agree … that working conditions in eastern Europe are generally under-reported and increased worker rights protection is called for. More should be done to improve wages and we know, first-hand, that engagement between local suppliers, unions, governments, and buyers can pay dividends and improve the overall lives of workers,” it said.
Zara’s parent company, Inditex, confirmed that it produced a small number of shoes in Romania and Albania. It said it operated a strict code of conduct to comply with the most stringent labour and human rights standards. It added: “In line with a key recommendation of the report, Inditex is working hard, worldwide, to drive living wages throughout its supply chain.”
Lowa stressed that it too set the highest ethical standards. In a statement, it said: “Lowa strongly condemns the deplorable conditions shown in these reports. The decision to manufacture 100% ‘made in Europe’ incorporates our assurance of fair and humane manufacturing conditions. We will be intensifying our oversights in this area in order to be absolutely certain that facilities producing for Lowa abide by such conditions.”
The other brands did not respond to the allegations in the report or to the Observer’s request for comment.
Three and a half years ago I was abruptly fired from a job that I had worked in for just short of a year. It was demanding, high-pressured, and I was proud of the work I had accomplished – but I accept that under my watch a deadline was missed. The firing process was humiliating, leading me to avoid applying for jobs. After about six months I did get a job (the only one I got an interview for) which was lower in pay and skill level, and away from the fashion industry I had previously spent seven years in. But it allowed me to remain financially independent.
I worked there for two years, choosing to leave in the hope of getting back into the industry I loved.
Although my confidence has slowly increased, it continually takes a knock. Having spent more than three years out of the fashion industry my skills and experience have been rendered irrelevant. I have no problem with taking on lower-level roles and working my way back up, but it seems to receive responses such as “weird” and “why?”, considering my previous managerial position.
I am too old for graduate schemes and cannot apply for internships for the same reason. I am slowly coming to realise that I may no longer have a career in the industry after exhausting my contacts, but I don’t know what I can apply for and whether I can be taken as a serious candidate for roles I feel brave enough to put myself up for.
I don’t need to tell you this, but confidence, when shattered, can take a very long time indeed to regain anything like its original muscle. And when subjected to further setbacks, as yours has been, recovery can be still further postponed. I say this not to rub in an obvious truth, but because once accepted, it has an important bearing on your future employment strategy.
You worked in the industry for seven years, but because that was three years ago, the ever fashion-conscious fashion industry chooses to see your experience as no longer relevant. However short-sighted that may be, you’re probably wise not to fight it.
But the main point is this: there are almost certainly jobs on the periphery of the fashion industry where the pressure is less but your experience will still have a value. I’m thinking, for example, of public relations or feature journalism, or setting up fashion shoots or working in retail. Thinking back over your own seven years in the business should prompt the thought of other such jobs, where a feel for fashion is a bonus but you don’t need the very latest cutting-edge knowledge.
In other words, don’t assume that your fashion experience no longer has any value simply because a return to the centre of the industry itself seems unlikely.
• I would look for jobs that mirror the skills you need for fashion then try to move across. So if it’s basically “project management”, do that in any field you can get into. geraldinemitchell
• Fashion is a savagely competitive industry. You need to ask yourself just how much you love it. There are other things you can do. Some related to what you’ve been doing, such as buying. olderbutwiser
• Make sure your CV is skills focused so that your post-fashion industry experience can be sold to prospective employers as transferable skills. Fairyfink
I have been involved with a small charity for many years on a voluntary basis, and a few years ago was offered a part-time position. I feel passionately about the work the charity does and am committed to doing whatever I can to help it succeed.
However, when I became a member of staff, it became apparent that the then chief executive was not up to the job. A number of staff members, including myself, approached the trustees to express our concerns. The boss was eventually ushered out over the following year, but not without considerable damage to staff morale, with several leaving because working conditions became so difficult.
Things then calmed down, and our new chief executive is in situ. The problem is, the situation is even worse than with his predecessor! We can’t approach the trustees again as they clearly have faith that he can do the job, having appointed him. As he comes across to us, he doesn’t seem to understand the charity or what we are trying to achieve, is brusque and appears dictatorial and bureaucratic. Senior staff say they find him impossible to work with, and sadly end up trying to find ways to avoid involving him in decisions. We can’t see – from our standpoint at work – that he has anything to add and he obstructs the positive initiatives of others.
This is not like a regular business. As charity workers we all believe so much in what we are doing and what we want to achieve, and it becomes very personal. But what can we do now?
I think you’re wrong to rule out another approach to the trustees. I can absolutely understand how difficult this must seem: you fear coming across as a perpetually dissatisfied bunch of moaners who resent all forms of authority. And it will certainly not please the trustees to be told they’ve made a serious mistake in this appointment; their first instinct may well be to defend him.
But I still believe your responsibility is to the charity – and simply trying to function under these difficult circumstances will almost certainly not be enough. I suggest you take it in stages. Write a calm, brief, factual note to the trustees on your new chief executive’s first six months (or whatever period seems appropriate). Say you hope that his dictatorial approach can be put down to his unfamiliarity with the charity and its people. Meanwhile, you’ll all do everything you can to help him make it work.
If, as seems likely, more months pass with no improvement in his manner and management skills, the trustees will surely have to listen to you.
• If two CEOs have ended up behaving in a similar manner, maybe there’s something inherent in the role that creates this behaviour. Did you see the job description when the role was advertised? Are you friendly with any of the trustees? You could have an informal chat and try to find out what the trustees want. He may just be a bad fit, but it might be worth a little investigation to get a full understanding of the facts. fizzdarling
• Playing devil’s advocate, your team has been working under someone ineffectual and is used to having autonomy. The new guy is coming in to a rudderless organisation and trying to get a firm grip. Being popular will not be in their job description. The key questions are, what is the strategy set by trustees, and is the CEO following it? If he is then knuckle under. If not, you have cause for complaint. UNCHARITABLE
• If you seriously want to change something, approach the trustees and tell them what you’ve told us. thespleen
Do you need advice on a work issue? For Jeremy’s and readers’ help, send a brief email to dear.jeremy@theguardian.com. Please note that he is unable to answer questions of a legal nature or to reply personally.
With Brexit jolting the financial markets and interest rates at a new historic low, you might be tempted to just keep your spare cash in a shoe box. But if you know your Adidas Gazelles from your Nike Airs, you could do better investing it in the contents. Trainers are hot property at the moment, whether it’s pulling off the “athleisure” trend for the office or school run, or turning the pile of unworn shoes in your cupboard into a pension pot.
“Alternative investment” classes –in fine wine, whisky and art – have enjoyed increasing popularity in recent years as wealthy investors looked for a place to park cash away from financial markets after the credit crunch shredded their share portfolios. But can trainer trading really be a path to riches for people with a nose for street fashion?
For the novice, understanding trainer chic can be as hard to get your head around as Libor. For starters, sellers focus on “deadstock”, a name given to pristine unworn shoes. Then there is figuring out which way the fashion wind is blowing. Forums earnestly debate subjects such as, “What do Chinese sneakerheads think about Yeezys?” and, “Is the Jordan hype slowing down?”.
The global trainer (or sneaker, for the Americans) resale market is estimated to be worth $6bn. What sends “sneakerheads” – those who collect or trade shoes – into a frenzy is trading in limited edition footwear from major sports brands paired with celebrities such as Eminem and Kanye West. The potential for hobbyists to make money is fuelled by websites such as StockX and K’lekt, whose trading platforms have helped improve liquidity and price transparency in the opaque secondary market.
The virtual price tags on StockX run in some cases to five figures, with a pair of Eminem-branded Nike Air Jordans on sale for almost $17,000 despite the uppers being made of canvas rather than the gold plate the price might imply. For those whose rapper/trainer guru of choice is West, a pair of his Adidas Yeezy Boost 750s is on sale for a gym membership-busting $1,800 – bringing the seller a sizable profit on their original sale price of $350.
Josh Luber, co-founder and chief executive of US based StockX, says the resale market is growing at 10-20% a year, which is a slowdown on the “hyper-growth” seen between 2011 and 2013. Since the site’s launch in February, it has attracted 26,500 listings.
“People are passionate about sneakers, and brands like Nike and Adidas have been great at building up hype in the sneakerhead community,” says the former IBM consultant, who started collecting trainers at the age of eight.
The site’s backers include US billionaire Dan Gilbert and Marshall Mathers, better-known as Eminem.
StockX is not regulated like other exchanges, but offers the kind of trading tools more usually found on specialist financial sites. This means sellers or hobbyists can use the site to monitor their shoe collection’s worth as if it was a share portfolio, even if they are planning to sell on eBay or Facebook or just keep them stacked up in a corner.
The StockX portfolio of one seller, who uses the handle OMR1, is valued at more than $366,000 and has notched up a gain of 256%. This person has betted heavily on the popularity of Air Jordan trainers, which make up half the 549 pairs they own. At the other end of the scale, a large number of sellers on the site have just one or two pairs for and are nursing hefty losses, with portfolios deemed worthless.
Sportswear analyst Matt Powell, who writes the influential Sneakernomics blog, says the athletic shoe market is “growing nicely”, although demand for fashion styles is stronger than for performance shoes, which comprise a larger part of the overall market. “Limited-edition shoes are not released in commercial quantities and therefore are pretty meaningless [to the overall picture],” says Powell who cautions potential investors: “Like with any collectible, the market can be very volatile.”
Germany’s Adidas recently reported bumper sales and profits for the first six months of 2016. Its strong performance was helped by a 50% increase in sales at its Originals division, which takes in popular resale fodder such as Yeezy Boosts, as well as retro classics like Stan Smith and Gazelle. But market leader Nike also dominates the resale market, as enthusiasts covet iterations of the Air Jordan – named after basketball legend Michael Jordan – even though they have been around since the 1980s.
Gary Warnett, a blogger who worked on now-defunct online store Crooked Tongues, says social networks have turned a niche pursuit into an industry, with soaring prices inviting opportunists to enter the fray. “Social media has blown up this world and exposed it to a new audience. What used to be myriad of subcultures has become mainstream, with a lot of desire focused on six or seven silhouettes, like Yeezy, NMD and Air Jordan. Kanye West’s influence on the young buying public is massive.”
If StockX is successful, the plan is to become a wider “stock market of things”, trading collectibles such as comics, watches and handbags. Luber says he doesn’t know how many of its sellers do this as a job, but suggests “not many”.
“Some people make a good living,” says Warnett who, in common with many collectors, has never parted with any of his hundreds of pairs. “The concept of reselling has become mainstream: even peers who aren’t into trainers are aware of their value. But it’s like any kind of speculation – if you don’t flip them in time you may as well be wearing them.”
Rio de Janeiro will be Adidas chief executive Herbert Hainer’s last Olympic Games. After 15 years in charge of the German sportswear giant, he presided over his last set of results via a conference call from the host city.
At the start of last year, after several profit warnings and a slump into third place behind Nike and Under Armour in the key US market, it looked like Hainer might be leaving Adidas under a cloud. But earlier this month he could probably have danced the samba.
“These financial results are just fantastic,” he told investors as the company reported a 21% increase in sales to €4.4bn and a near 100% increase in profits, to €291m for the second quarter. “And I saved the best for last.” Adidas shares, which are listed on the Deutsche Börse, have more than doubled in value, and are now changing hands for 152p.
He could have chosen a pair of Stan Smith trainers for his imagined victory dance, because the renewed popularity of the classic style, which Adidas has been making since the 1960s, fuelled a 50% sales increase at its Originals fashion division during that record quarter. Shrewd reissues of other retro trainer styles as well as big name collaborations, such as one for Yeezy Boost with Kanye West (pictured, with Kim Kardashian) have helped make Adidas cool again. And in doing so they secured a podium finish for Hainer. ZW
The British Wool Marketing Board has a slogan at once complacent and defensive. Man it reiterates throughout its explanatory literature, cannot match it. And no synthetic fibre can rival wool’s list of virtues: it is hard-wearing; its texture pleases the touch, its lustre the eye; it sheds rain and it insulates the wearer from variations in temperature; it accepts dye readily so that all sorts of subtleties of shade are possible; and it comes, in Britain at least, in so many different strengths and qualities that it is extraordinarily versatile.
Wool’s decline after the last war had more to do with image than performance. The post-war world indulged itself in a passion for the synthetic, the “miraculous” fruits of mankind’s ingenuity. Synthetics were by-products of rich industries like petro-chemicals which not only understood image-building but could afford it.
At some point in the eco-conscious early seventies the pendulum began its long swing back aided by industry-promoting bodies like the Wool Secretariat which fought image with image by creating the Woolmark, now an internationally recognised symbol of quality.
The erstwhile enemy, technology, was pressed into service to augment wool’s natural strengths so that now it can also be shrink-resistant, moth-proof, fire-proof, shower-proof, stain-proof, and durably pleated (which means not quite permanently pleated).
There remains one problem, however. Wool is still a labour intensive, fragmented industry and that makes the stuff expensive. There are about 90,000 wool producers in the United Kingdom producing about 35 million kilos a year – about 420 kilos each from an average flock of between 100 and 200 sheep. Centuries of selective breeding have evolved nearly 40 different pure breeds and many cross-breds (whereas Australia effectively produces 706 million kilos a year from two breeds). That is a buyers’ headache. The modern spinning industry needs large quantities of wool of uniform type and quality.
To bring some order into this wild variety and to ensure that the predominantly small producers get a good and consistent price for their fleeces, the British Wool Marketing Board was set up in 1950. Only the Shetland Isles are excepted from the law which insists that any farmer with more than four adult sheep must register with the board. His wool is then graded (there are more than 200 grades of British wool), matched with “clips” of the same grade from other farms, and auctioned in large bales in Bradford or Edinburgh.
It is an efficient operation and an economically successful one as long as exports can be maintained (the Blackface sheep of Scotland and its north of England cousins provide mattress-filling for Italian factories; British tweed and worsted is prized everywhere) and the domestic spinning and weaving industries remain healthy.
The former has recently been threatened by strong sterling and the latter by that and by recession at home. So a little more image-building is necessary. Richard Passmore, the Board’s promotion manager, has decided that, with quality firmly established in the public consciousness, glamour – as in high fashion – is the next key word.
Most top designers would use wool from choice, anyway, but they would probably not give too much thought to its origins and since British weaving mills are not, on the whole, producing the most exciting fabric to be had, they would quite probably choose foreign cloth.
So, at the behest of the Board, some of Britain’s brightest young designers have incorporated garments in British wool in their autumn collections. Among them are Wendy Dagworthy, Victor Herbert, Paul Howie, Anna Roose, Mulberry, Paul Smith, Margaret Howell, Kay Cosserat, Alison Taylor, Bridget Foley, and the heavyweights Daks Simpson and Aquascutum.
Rich browns and rusts are strong colours for the autumn, which is fortuitous, since the conservative, tradition-steeped majority of British weavers favour bracken and heather shades. Niggles aside, it is a stunning cross-section of the most exciting in British design and there is plenty of sizzling winter colour among the knits – especially Paul Howie’s.
And high fashion aside, the Board produces a mail order leaflet packed with British wool goodies from tartan car rugs through fleece jerkins, and Fair Isle jerseys, to fleecy toy lambs and teddies. Available from the British Wool Marketing Board, PD Dept, Oak Mills, Clayton, Bradford, West Yorkshire BD14 6JD (0274 882091).
Americans throw away 25bn pounds of clothing, shoes, accessories and other textiles every year. While some of it gets resold at thrift stores or recycled, most of it – 85%, in fact – goes straight to the dump. Nearly 13m tons of textiles were dumped into landfills in the US in 2013, the most recent year for which there is data from the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
A new venture called the Renewal Workshop aims to reduce some of that waste by repairing clothes that customers have returned to stores as well as items that are damaged during manufacturing. While it’s difficult to find current estimates on just how big of a problem this is, clothing makers toss out around 10%-12% of garments with simple flaws such as broken zippers, according to a 2006 estimate from the book, Apparel Manufacturing: Sewn Product Analysis. By correcting light damage on clothing that ordinarily wouldn’t make it to sales racks – think jackets with ripped linings, pants with holes and stained shirts – the Renewal Workshop hopes to head off the inevitable garbage dump.
The project, which launched in June, has attracted more than $1m in venture funding from VTF Capital, based in Las Vegas and San Francisco, and Closed Loop Ventures in New York. “They’re building a whole new infrastructure for a whole new phase of life in the apparel industry,” said Jen Taylor, brand manager and director of creative development for Mountain Khakis, a Jackson Hole, Wyoming-based outdoor apparel company that recently partnered with the workshop.
The workshop is the latest in a number of secondhand clothing websites that have popped up in recent years, including San Francisco-based thredUp, which allows customers to buy and sell used clothing online and donates or recycles the items that don’t pass muster. Twice, a similar Bay Area-based company for buying and selling secondhand clothes, was acquired by eBay in 2015.
At first glance, the Renewal Workshop may seem like a glorified tailoring operation. But co-founder Jeff Denby, who previously co-founded Pact Apparel, a Boulder, Colorado-based company that makes sustainable, organic cotton clothes, said the business is based on volume. The company will take garments from sustainability-focused partner companies such as prAna, Indigenous, Toad & Co, and Ibex, who pay a membership fee to the Renewal Project. The clothes are sorted into problem groups, such as those that need repairs on zippers or pockets, and the workshop makes the repairs in batches. “Instead of being a repair center, which is not very efficient, we’re acting like a production facility,” said Denby.
The repair work will take place at the workshop’s warehouse in Cascade Locks, Oregon. Soiled items will be cleaned with a waterless washing system from Tersus Solutions, a Colorado-based company that has developed a process using pressurized carbon dioxide. Repaired garments will then be co-branded with a Renewal Workshop label and sold on the workshop’s website at 30%-50% off the original listed price. The partner brands get an undisclosed portion of the sales when the co-branded items are purchased, since the Renewal Project doesn’t pay them for the damaged goods.
The factory can process hundreds of thousands of garments per year, according to Denby. “When we get the product, it’s pretty low value, but it allows us to flow it through our system in a way that’s really efficient,” he said. “We’re able to capture a margin off that that makes the business sustainable.”
The company currently employs five people, though the plan is to expand to 30 as soon as it can be scaled up, something Denby anticipates will happen soon.
Pop-up sales are scheduled next year at stores such as Nordstrom and Whole Foods, according to co-founder Nicole Bassett, a former director of sustainability at Southern California clothier prAna. She says partner brands will also be able to sell their refurbished items through their own stores by the end of 2017. There are also plans in the works for so-called upcycling, creating new products such as aprons out of the clothes that can’t be repaired.
So far, the process seems to be working. Mountain Khakis’ Taylor said that of the 171 test garments sent to the workshop last month, 99% were successfully cleaned or repaired. She anticipates the clothes will appeal to the burgeoning maker movement. “It adds some cachet, actually, to the product,” Taylor said. “The kind of Etsy element of the unique repair is going to lend some individuality to each of these styles.”
And because the workshop generates reports on the types of repairs each product needs, the partner brands can improve their manufacturing efficiencies, she said. Basic reporting on what types of repairs the clothes needed comes with the membership fee, but brands can pay extra for more detailed reporting.
Tasha Lewis, an assistant professor at Cornell University’s Department of Fiber Science and Apparel Design, said the business structure holds promise. “It is very similar to what off-price stores used to do more of in the past – basically selling second quality goods to a different consumer,” she said. “I like the idea of making the repairs/cleaning the items before reselling.” Lewis is currently working with clothing retailer Eileen Fisher on its Green Eileen project, which recovers and cleans the brand’s pre-owned garments, then resells them at a discount.
The key to making such a business work is to be extremely efficient with a supply chain that already has thin margins. Logistical costs would need to be minimized, according to Deishin Lee, an assistant professor of operations management at Boston College. “In theory, it should be a great idea, and if there’s a market out there, it could at least mitigate an environmental problem and they could make a decent profit,” Lee said.
But a business based on repairing damaged goods strays from the typical supply chain – after all, the aim of the original manufacturer is to produce quality clothes from the start. In the Renewal Workshop model, “Your ‘supplier’ is actually not interested in supplying you, per se,” Lee said. “In fact, the goal is to actually have nothing to supply to you in the case of factory seconds.”
Plus, it’s difficult to predict how the business will play out on the consumer side. It may prove hard to match up items with customers since the nature of seconds means each style may only be available in a limited number of sizes. “They won’t get, let’s say, 100 pieces of the same size and the same color in the sizes that they need,” said Ilse Metchek, president of the non-profit California Fashion Association. “Damages don’t go across the board.”
Even if shoppers flock to the reworked versions of their favorite brands, the co-branding relationship can be a double-edged sword, according to Lewis. A partner brand’s image could suffer if consumers think the quality has been compromised –but the same thing could happen if shoppers decide they like the discounted clothes more than the full-priced versions.
From culottes to “cold shoulder” tops and woven loafers last seen in Miami Vice, many Britons have struggled with this summer’s fashions, but now there is an even more unpalatable trend on the horizon – in the shape of higher prices.
The devaluation of sterling following the June Brexit vote has had major ramifications for store chiefs who pay in dollars for large quantities of imported goods. The first indication of where prices could be heading came last week from Next, one of the UK’s biggest clothing retailers, which pencilled in increases of up to 5% in 2017.
“We have always taken the view that if our costs go up, our selling prices will go up,” said Next chief executive Lord Wolfson.
But fashion retailers are already struggling to persuade shoppers to part with their cash as weak wage growth is compounded by a cyclical shift towards spending on eating out and other leisure activities. “Fashion has been the worst-performing sector in retail this year by a clear margin,” says Richard Lim, chief executive of Retail Economics. “Growth in earnings has not fed through into retail sales, and clothing has borne the brunt of that. There’s also an ‘age of abundance’ thing going on ...people have got to the point of near-saturation with a lot of things.”
According to Kantar Worldpanel, spending on clothes, shoes and accessories contracted slightly, by 0.1%, in the year to 5 June – the first time the £36bn fashion market has declined in almost seven years. Adding to the gloom, a poll in July by market researcher GfK recorded the biggest slide in consumer confidence for more than 26 years. Its confidence index was at -12, from -1 in its June survey, carried out before the referendum. That was the sharpest month-to-month drop since March 1990, shortly before the UK fell into recession.
Next said there had been no Brexit effect on sales as yet, but analysts point to the pattern seen in the last recession. Northern Rock collapsed in September 2007 but it was not until the following April that like-for-like retail sales started falling. UK consumers are also used to clothes becoming cheaper rather than more expensive: price deflation has been running at 6-7%.
Kantar analyst Glen Tooke says its most recent reading shows the decline deepening. “People are buying less,” he says. “We are not seeing people buy in advance of a season any more. We didn’t really have a winter last year. If it gets cold they buy winter clothes, but if it doesn’t, they don’t. Stores have become increasingly reliant on discounting, and power has shifted into the hands of consumers.”
Next said the sales picture was “extremely volatile”, with big swings dictated by the weather. “The market is being driven by need,” said Wolfson. “If the sun comes out and people need summer clothes, they’re buying them.”
Bernstein analyst Jamie Merriman is concerned that fragile consumer confidence will see spending on clothing “take another leg down” over the next 12-24 months. “At current spot prices, sterling is down 10% versus the US dollar compared with last year,” she says. “This is unlikely to be the only form of cost inflation, with increased wages coming through due to the national living wage and cotton prices spiking in recent weeks.” Taken together, she adds, these point to a significant level of inflation for retailers like Next to try to pass on to customers if they want to keep profit margins intact.
Sterling’s plunge has actually increased Next’s sourcing costs for next year by 9%, but that is mitigated by other currencies, such as the yuan, weakening against the dollar. It is also looking to get more goods from countries such as Bangladesh, Cambodia and Burma.
Lim says a geographic shift in sourcing was already in motion as rising wages in China sent retailers hunting for cheaper places: “Ten years ago the majority would have been sourced in China but it has already started moving to other Asia-Pacific countries.”
Retailers have currency hedges, which offer short-term insurance against swings in sterling, in place for this year but, Lim says, UK clothing factory-gate prices – which are a good proxy for the global picture – are already up 1.2% in June, compared with an average decline of 1.2% last year. “It is going to be a very challenging time for clothing retailers.”
Tooke says retailers now have two choices: “They could raise opening prices, but run the risk of having to offer deeper discounts later because shoppers notice that something that cost £30 a year ago is now £35. Or they could keep opening prices the same, but offer fewer discounts: the challenge then is how to drive footfall.”
The little girl looks winsomely into the middle distance, passive and unsmiling, presumably waiting for the next titbit of gossip to descend upon her kitten ears. The little boy grins and proudly shows off the image of Albert Einstein on his chest. “Your future starts here,” a new Gap advert tells him, which unfortunately is true. He is destined to be a “little scholar”. And the girl? A “social butterfly”, which isn’t even a job. Oh well, her chambray shirt (with pink logo, obviously) may not fast-track her into a science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem) subject but it will be “the talk of the playground”. And what more could a girl want?
Welcome to the world of everyday sexism in children’s advertising. Like advertising, and Gap, it is everywhere. Watch any TV advert aimed at children and you will see girls in shiny princess outfits emoting into microphones and boys dutifully pushing fire engines. Go to the children’s section of any clothes shop and you will encounter primary-coloured stripes for boys and pastel polka dots for girls. We are living in an age when even shapes are gendered. It is that ludicrous.
The Gap ad designates boys as brainy and girls as sociable – gender stereotypes that have been around much longer than pink Lego. But people are fed up with it.
Last year a similar row arose when Marks & Spencer brought out a dinosaur-laden Natural History Museum clothing range for boys only, leading to the Labour MP Chi Onwurah to accuse the retailer of “gender specific marketing” and the launch of a #dinosaursforall campaign by Let Clothes Be Clothes. Unisex clothing is becoming more prevalent in adult ranges, with the high street retailer Zara launching its Ungendered line earlier this year. And small changes are happening in the grimly gendered world of toys, with Hamleys abandoning its pink and blue signs for girls and boys, and Sainsbury’s no longer labelling its doctor costumes for boys and nurse outfits for girls.
My son is almost three, and I can think of many times in his young life when he has encountered the kind of sexism in the Gap ad. Sometimes I’m the one dishing it out, such as when I find myself saying he is “such a boy” because he loves trains, hates arts and crafts, and can’t sit still for a second. All of which is true, as is the fact that he has two mothers and no masculine role model. None of it makes him “such a boy”: we have society to thank for that. I have to keep reminding myself of this because that’s the insidious nature of gender stereotyping: we’re all at it, all the time.
Another random example: when my son was learning to walk, a friend advised getting a toy pushchair to help him along. She had done this successfully with her son in spite of his dad’s embarrassment. See what I mean about sexism being everywhere? Anyway at John Lewis, where toy pushchairs come in pink and blue (which I’m guessing is supposed to be progress) the shop assistant said she had never in all her life seen a boy push a buggy. I told her to go outside and look for herself at a world in which dads push them all the time, seemingly without shame. Anyway, I never bought the stupid pushchair but my son learned to walk all the same. I’m sure there is a moral in there somewhere.
For some, concern about the impact of gender stereotyping on children is middle class over-reaction to the point of caricature. You know the argument: when two women are killed every week in England and Wales by a current or former partner, who cares if little Sylvie is wearing a fair-trade gender-neutral top covered with yellow cars? (Yellow, in clothes-speak, is a leading gender-neutral colour.)
The point is that all of it matters, and all of it is connected. Whether gender stereotyping takes place in an email, on a T-shirt, in a toy shop or at a school, the effects are serious for all of us. And they are far-reaching, with an impact on everything from the gender pay gap and women being under-represented in Stem sectors to widespread sexual bullying in schools.
The Gap ad is not an anomaly: it is the product of the deeply gendered world in which we all live, work and are grossly misrepresented. This kind of gender stereotyping is harmful not only to girls and boys but to women, men and every gender in between. After all, each of us should grow with the possibility of becoming a scientist, a social butterfly, neither or both.
Raf Simons has been named as the chief creative officer of Calvin Klein. This appointment was widely expected in fashion, following the announcement in June that Francisco Costa and Italo Zucchelli, women’s and menswear creative directors respectively, would be leaving the brand. Simons – who left Christian Dior in October - will work across both men’s and womenswear for Calvin Klein.
The announcement was made on social media – with a black and white image of Simons appearing on Instagram on Tuesday afternoon. The caption said he would be “chief creative officer of the brand, effective immediately” with his first collection for Calvin Klein for autumn/winter 2017, to be shown in September in New York. It looks like Simons will be very much in an overseeing role, to be supported by Pieter Mulier, his studio manager at Dior, who will now be creative director at Calvin Klein.
The brand’s statement stressed that Simons would manage a wider strategy “to unify all Calvin Klein brands under one creative vision’’. It now comprises around 25 product categories, with underwear and jeans brought back into the business in 2013. Steve Shiffman, CEO of Calvin Klein, was keen to emphasise the designer’s role of looking at the big picture, and to bring comparisons between Simons and Klein himself. “Not since Mr Klein, himself, was at the company has it been led by one creative visionary, and I am confident that this decision will drive the Calvin Klein brand and have a significant impact on its future,” he said. “Under his direction, Calvin Klein will further solidify its position as a leading global lifestyle brand.”
Simons’ workload will increase accordingly. This is the element that may surprise industry insiders. Simons, when leaving Dior, expressed a yearning for a better work-life balance. In a statement, he said his decision was “based entirely and equally on my desire to focus on other interests in my life, including my own brand, and the passions that drive me outside my work”. His own line is likely to continue (it did during his tenure at Dior) but those passions may take a hit with this new gig. The stewardship of a truly global brand – showing in New York, and based in Amsterdam with ambitions to reach worth of $10bn – was clearly a hard offer to pass up.
Simons’ combination of futurism, heritage, arty cool and sleek, elegant lines make him a natural fit for Calvin Klein – one that has been greeted with excitement by fashion insiders. Similar territory is part of the Calvin Klein DNA, especially during its 90s heyday, when shift dresses designed by Klein were worn by former employee Carolyn Bessette Kennedy and adverts for perfume like Obsession featuring a naked Kate Moss, scandalised the general public. Other ads, with Mark Wahlberg and Moss wearing the underpants with branding on the waistband in 1991, are now infamous.
The label was founded by Klein in 1968. His was the first designer brand to make jeans. Launching in 1978, the company had sold $70m (£48.6m) worth of women’s jeans a year later. Klein sold his company to Phillips-Van Heusen (which owns Tommy Hilfiger) for $400m (around £300m) in cash, and more in stocks and royalties over the 15 years following the deal. Costa and Zucchelli, handpicked by Klein, have held the creative reins since.
Simons was born in Belgium, and originally trained as a furniture designer. He launched his label in 1995, concentrating on menswear with youth culture references, and abstract shapes influenced by artwork and industrial design. He has worked well with other brands previously. Before signing on to Dior, he was creative director of Jil Sander for seven years.
Dior announced in July that Valentino’s Maria Grazia Chiuri would be Simon’s replacement. This was after speculation that designers, including Sarah Burton of Alexander McQueen and Christopher Kane, were up for the role. Chiuri will be the first woman to design for Dior in its 59 years. Judging by her work with co-designer Pierpaolo Piccioli at Valentino, where she has been creative director since 2008, she would bring a different, more romantic view to the house.
The clothing company Gap has been criticised over a new advertising campaign featuring an image of a boy, labelled “the little scholar”, wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with Albert Einstein’s face next to a girl wearing pink who is called “the social butterfly”.
The ad says of the boy “your future starts here”, while the girl’s clothes are “the talk of the playground”. The campaign has provoked outrage, with critics describing it as sexist.
Among the detractors was the Let Toys Be Toys campaign group, which calls on companies to stop limiting children’s interests by promoting some toys and books as only suitable for girls, and others only for boys.
The former children’s laureate Malorie Blackman’s response to the campaign was one of many other negative reactions to it on social media. There was no immediate response from Gap.
There have been very public campaigns to persuade toy and clothing manufacturers to abandon the stereotypes of boys as being active and clever, with girls passive and pretty.
The toy store Hamleys abandoned its pink and blue signs for boys and girls after being accused by one blogger of “gender apartheid”. The Pink Stinks campaign group has also successfully tackled many retailers over casual sexism, including persuading Sainsbury’s to stop labelling doctor costumes as for boys, and nurses and beauticians for girls.
One woman responded to Blackman’s tweet about the Gap campaign by saying: “That actually made me feel ill. Unbelievable.” Another wrote: “Where is this crap coming from? Who is driving it? My kids were born in the 80s and didn’t have this.”
The twin images show the girl in sparkly cat ears and a cream T-shirt with a pink “g” logo, while of the boy it says “shirts + graphic tees = genius ideas”.
Ruth Walker-Cotton pounced on a spelling mistake, tweeting: “My daughter & son both love to have genius ideas – please don’t limit them. Ps you spelt Einstein wrong.” The scientist’s name appears on the T-shirt spelled “Einstien”.
Joe Flatman tweeted to alert Gap about an ad from a commercial competitor, showing a girl with a rugby ball. He wrote: “@UKGap take note: your competitor @JoJoMamanBebe gets my custom when they manage mixed-gender messages like this.”
Sir Philip Green is threatening legal action against Dominic Chappell, the former owner of BHS, over the collapse of the department store chain. Green has been described as the “unacceptable face of capitalism” and blamed for the demise of BHS in a damning parliamentary report into the scandal.
However, the billionaire tycoon has fought back by sending legal letters to Chappell and the other members of his consortium, Retail Acquisitions. Green ran BHS for 15 years until he sold it in March 2015 for £1 to Retail Acquisitions, which is 90% owned by Chappell.
Green alleges that Retail Acquisitions misused BHS funds and that Chappell falsely represented his business credentials in prior to the deal. The legal letter, sent by Green’s solicitors at Linklaters, warns Chappell and his associates that they could be sued.
Although Green was heavily criticised by MPs in their report on BHS, Chappell is accused of having had his “hands in the till” and exploiting the retailer for his own personal gain. Retail Acquisitions took out at least £17m from BHS, including £11m in salaries and fees.
Green’s legal threats revolve around £7m that Retail Acquisitions took out of BHS and the lack of money it put in.
The tycoon claims that Retail Acquisitions breached the terms of its deal to buy BHS by diverting funds raised by the sale of the retailer’s property into its own bank account. The consortium pocketed £7m from the £32m sale of the BHS headquarters in London just days after buying the chain. Retail Acquisitions had previously agreed that all funds raised by the sale of BHS assets would remain in the business.
Green alleges that Chappell again broke the terms of their agreement by not pumping any of his own money into BHS. Instead, Chappell injected £5m into BHS through a loan that was secured against the retailer’s warehouse in the Midlands. This loan was paid off when Retail Acquisitions sold the warehouse in August.
Furthermore, Green believes that Chappell exaggerated his own business credentials during the negotiations to buy BHS, such as the success of an oil venture in Spain. The Guardian has found that Chappell was forced out of a company called Olivia Petroleum after taking around €400,000 (£315,000) from the company for his personal use.
Green declined to comment about the legal action, while Chappell did not return calls or emails seeking comment.
The Insolvency Service is understood to be examining whether there are grounds to disqualify members of the Retail Acquisitions consortium from being company directors in the future. It is exploring the conduct of Chappell and his associates as part of its investigation into the collapse of BHS. The Serious Fraud Office is also conducting a preliminary inquiry, but is yet to announce a formal investigation.
The scandal has led to heavy criticism of Green and Chappell by other business leaders. The Institute of Directors (IoD) said the collapse of BHS “casts a long shadow over British business”.
Oliver Parry, head of corporate governance at the IoD, a lobby group for business leaders, said: “The business community will be very worried about the damage this episode will do to public faith in capitalism. Now is the time to take a fresh look at how large privately owned companies are governed. Just because a company is not listed on the stock market, it does not mean there is no public interest in how it is run.
“After damning reports into BHS, and last week Sports Direct, there is a pressing need to work out how to raise levels of trust in how British companies are overseen.”
From the cotton farm to the clothing factory to the fashion show, the global apparel industry has more than its share of social and environmental problems.
Behind the images of beauty and style is an often dirty business that relies on water-intensive methods and toxic chemicals in its factories, most of them in poor countries and hidden from view. While garment work has provided a pathway out of poverty – now in China, but earlier in the US and UK – no worker should be exposed to the unsafe conditions that led to calamities like in Bangladesh, where in 2013 the collapse of the structurally unsafe Rana Plaza building killed more than 1,100 workers.
No company can solve such problems on its own. Yet an ambitious effort to bring the industry together to deliver sweeping changes has yet to deliver. The Sustainable Apparel Coalition (SAC), a global alliance of retailers, brands, suppliers, advocacy groups, labor unions and academics, aims to create “an apparel, footwear and home textiles industry that produces no unnecessary environmental harm and has a positive impact on people and communities”.
Four years ago, I took a close look at the coalition’s promising beginning. Last month at the Copenhagen Fashion Summit, an industry gathering focused on sustainability, I caught up with apparel industry executives and their critics to see how much progress the industry group has made – and opinions are mixed.
To its credit, the coalition, launched in 2009 by Walmart and Patagonia, has brought together 175 members whose companies account for more than 40% of the global apparel industry. They have been building what they expect to be the principal driver of change in the industry: a set of three online tools, known as the Higg Index, that measure the social and environmental impact of brands, manufacturing facilities and products. Companies are supposed to use the index to collect information from their own operations and their suppliers’, and all of it goes into a database that coalition members can use to evaluate suppliers. About 6,000 factories have provided information about their social and environmental impact.
But most coalition members have been slow to use the index, and there’s no evidence they are reducing – not merely reporting – their impact. A Higg tool designed to measure a product’s footprint – information such as the raw materials and energy used that might interest consumers – won’t be completed until next year. What’s more, none of the social and environmental data being collected is publicly available, at least for now. Companies aren’t even permitted to release their own Higg Index data.
Until the data becomes public, its value will be limited. Environmental and human rights groups that want to hold the industry accountable don’t have access to the information. Nor do investors, who worry about supply chain and reputation risks, have a reliable way to measure one company against another. Consumers who want to know how and where T-shirts or shoes are made will have to wait before they can use the data to learn whether those items are manufactured ethically. Right now, they get little information. Knowing, for example, that a shirt is composed of organic cotton or recycled polyester doesn’t say anything about the factory conditions where it was produced.
Linda Greer, a senior scientist at the Natural Resources Defense Council, says the coalition is moving too slowly to collect Higg data and isn’t doing enough to prod companies to remedy problems that turn up. “I am quite surprised at the lack of uptake,” she says. “There are too many companies, even with high profiles, that are not circulating the forms to their suppliers.”
Several big companies, led by H&M and Target, have embraced the Higg tools, as has Patagonia. Others have been slow to use them, but the coalition declined to identify the laggards. Several major industry players, including fast fashion retailer Forever 21, have declined to join the SAC at all.
Nike says it hasn’t used Higg widely, not because it doesn’t support SAC’s effort but because of what Hannah Jones, its chief sustainability officer, describes as “technical, boring IT reasons”. Nike monitors its supply chain using its own software, Jones says.
“The vast majority are using some of the tools,” says Jason Kibbey, the coalition’s chief executive. “The scale and depth with which they’re using them varies widely.”
Several reasons explain why the index hasn’t been widely used. For one thing, it’s still under development. Building the Higg Index is a complex undertaking, Kibbey says. The coalition has to balance competing demands – making tools accessible and relatively easy to use, yet powerful enough to capture an array of environmental and social impacts from farms, factories and stores.
Brands also are resistant to spending the time and energy to gathering data, especially from their suppliers. Making a piece of clothing involves multiple suppliers, including: farmers who grow the raw materials; dye-and-finishing mills where environmental impacts are greatest; and cut-and-sew factories where garments are produced. But brands don’t typically deal directly with all those suppliers, and many don’t bother to dig deep into their supply chains.
Several coalition members tell me they plan to make the index data public eventually. Kibbey says his members have not agreed when that information will become public.
In the meantime, individual brands have launched their own campaigns to address environmental and social challenges. Nike, for example, has invested in designing and making sneakers that use less material. H&M has improved the dirty process of dyeing textiles and nudged its customers to recycle their clothes. Patagonia discovered slave labor practices among its suppliers and took steps to root them out.
But those efforts, while worthwhile, aren’t enough to reduce the enormous resource requirements of the fashion business and the waste it generates. In the US alone, 10.5m tons of textiles go to landfills each year. There’s lots of talk in the industry about the circular economy, but real progress has been scant.
Will the coalition ever achieve its lofty goal? That seems to be a big uncertainty, even from its members. Rick Ridgeway, a longtime Patagonia executive who has guided the coalition from the start, says it best: “The hypothesis is that putting better data into the hands of decision makers in the apparel value chains is going to result in better decisions. But that’s a hypothesis.”
He goes on: “Now the rubber is going to meet the road. Are companies, year over year, going to improve? Are they going to lower their impact? Are they going to benefit the people in the supply chain? We don’t know. I’m optimistic, but until that happens, the Sustainable Apparel Coalition is an unproven experiment.”
Jack Wills the brand? That’s it. Aimed at students. Pheasant with a walking stick for a logo. Quite posh.
And that’s sexy? Well, no, the brand isn’t sexy. The brand sells expensive hoodies and overpriced polo shirts. It sells a boating blazer so obnoxious that it must exist only to help identify people who want to be punched. Jack Wills isn’t sexy.
Then what is? A recent Jack Wills mailout catalogue. It was so sexy it ended up banned.
What’s so sexy about it? It contains images of several attractive teenagers standing around in their pants, having fun.
I hate stupid sexy fun. Me too. Imagine seeing a catalogue like that as a kid and realising that you would one day be expected to stand around in your pants with your friends in an annoyingly louche manner. It would ruin your life.
Oh God, were these catalogues addressed to children? That’s appalling. Well, no. They were actually addressed to adults. But one of the adults was a parent, and that parent had kids who might feasibly have seen the catalogue, so they complained. Does that count?
I don’t think so. Well, the Advertising Standards Authority said it did. Its statement read: “The images in question showed [teenagers] relaxing and engaging in activities such as dancing, drinking and reading a newspaper together.”
Teenagers reading a newspaper? What an obscene fantasy! The ASA goes on: “Moreover, we noted that the story of the group of friends depicted them dancing and drinking while fully clothed, then dancing and drinking in their underwear … and a final scene of all of the characters in their underwear in bed together. We considered that this sequence of images … was sexually suggestive.”
And so it has been banned? Absolutely. Presumably, all future Jack Wills catalogues will feature normal teenage activities, such as being spotty and playing Xbox and having bad hair.
But where will kids find pictures of nudity now? Nowhere. The images were only available in that one Jack Wills catalogue, and now it has been banned. Our kids are safe again! Thanks, ASA!
I heard only the beginning of the sentence. “That manufacturer has not solved his sizing problem. I had 15 of his suits sent round...”
The speaker was one of the most engagingly down-to-earth fashion journalists in the business and her concern with sizing was reasonable. But her words just proved, yet again, that most people in and around the rag trade have no idea what sheer murder the average woman suffers shopping for clothes. Where, for example, would you go to see 15 suits, confident that they would all be what you wanted and about your size, even if they did vary a bit?
I know the stores get all the blame from the public and it isn’t all their fault. Manufacturers are unreliable at deliveries, they make up a limited number of pretty dresses to get them featured in the Press and then don’t produce enough of the goods. Their sizes are limited and frustration is intense for anyone with hips under 34 and over 38, and quite frustrating enough for anyone in between.
Even the few manufacturers who shine like a good deed in a stock-size world and do make up large and/or tiny sizes seem to think that anyone so disfavoured wants to wear only the drabbest and most conservative clothes. There is a huge market awaiting the first designer to realise that a lot of large girls just want his pretty, well-cut clothes in large sizes. They aren’t all plump and stately matrons; they are just well-built women. Similarly, not all little girls are cuddly pieces of blonde candy floss dressing like baby dollies. They are just searching in vain for adult clothes in small sizes.
Screaming-point
But whatever the faults of the manufacturers, it is at store level that screaming-point is reached by most women. Something has gone wrong and the stores haven’t kept pace with the revolutionary developments in the clothing industry. Not so long ago a department store had a definite character, stocked a certain kind of clothes, and you were fairly sure that it would have what suited you.
Now for a store to be exciting it must have an ever-changing variety of clothes from many different manufacturers rather than a comprehensive range of a certain kind of clothes. This makes shopping difficult if you are a stock size, and almost impossible if you are large or small, because no buyer is going to order a lot of sizes and run the risk of being left with slightly passé dresses in sizes that are difficult to sell.
It would be nice to see more manufacturers selling in their own retail shops – as the Polly Peck Boutique in Bond Street and such firms as Jaeger and Aquascutum. The great advantage of this is that you feel that the salespeople have some contact with the people who supply the goods and can pressurise them. This doesn’t, alas, always work out in practice and everyone has her own bitter tale of bad service in individual shops. The trouble at the moment seems to be that it is impossible to lay down what service in a shop should mean. Are the salespeople there just to wrap your goods and take your money or do you want their advice, even when it is frank and useful?
One solution
This problem has been solved in other retail markets. Either you go to a specialist shop if you want more service, or else goods are more or less standardised wherever you buy them. When buying food you go to a supermarket for freedom and lack of interference or a small grocer for service. It seems to me that the big stores should follow suit. Either they should be self-service stores with no pressure to buy and the minimum of attention. Their attraction would then be just this and the fact that they had large stocks at all price levels. Or they should offer real service to attract custom.
A department store depending on service should have – among other things – a children’s creche, somebody in every department to advise dispassionately on materials and brands, a fashion co-ordinator to advise on clothes and accessories, a real rest room with writing materials, magazines, etc. It should send goods on approval, refund money immediately, give you advice about where to obtain goods unavailable in the store.
If the idea of service were to become a highly skilled reality this might also go some way to solving the salesgirl’s plight. At present her life is a pretty unrewarding one. The paltry commission is her only incentive and her relationship with her customers is fraught with resentment on either one or both sides. Yet the most interesting thing potentially for a salesgirl is making contact with the customer and guiding her with the knowledge of something she knows about and the customer doesn’t – i.e., clothes in general and the store’s stock in particular.
If the department stores would only make up their minds about service – either to do away with it completely or to make it a specialised rewarding job – we might, just possibly, see shopping reinstated as one of life’s pleasures.
This is an edited extract, click to read more
Within minutes of the end of Sanzaa’s catwalk show, there was a swarm of women flicking through rails of clothing and flashing their credit cards at the fashion label’s exhibition stall.
Sanya and Zahra, a pair of friends who have grown their “modest fashion” business from a small market stall in Bradford over the past six years, were frantically wrapping long tunics and dresses in black tissue paper while advising customers on purchases.
Among them was Amara Sadeeq, a London law graduate and full-time mother to three small children, who had chosen a dusty pink abaya. “I usually wear black, but I thought I’d try something a bit different,” she said. “Some members of my family always wear black, and don’t approve of makeup. But I think women need to look beautiful and feel confident.”
Sadeeq had come to the Saverah Women Expo, at the Intercontinental hotel next to London’s O2 Arena, along with about 5,000 others. The event was to showcase Muslim businesses aimed at women: modest fashion, halal cosmetics, jewellery, greetings cards and chocolates for Ramadan. Muslim charities, banks and solicitors were present, and motivational talks were on the schedule.
The expo was also about “empowering Muslim women. We have a voice and a lifestyle, we start businesses, we don’t fit the stereotype,” said Shazia Ramzan, a spokeswoman for Saverah.
About 90 businesses were exhibiting at the event, including dozens of international and UK fashion designers. “Modest fashion has been a phenomenon elsewhere, especially in the Gulf, for a while, and now it’s becoming more of a statement here,” said Ramzan.
The global Muslim clothing market is forecast to be worth $327bn by 2020, according to the latest Global Islamic Economy report. International retailers such as Marks and Spencer and Uniqlo have launched ranges aimed at Muslim women.
Farheen Rahman, a designer based in Kolkata who trained at the London College of Fashion, had returned to the UK to show her range of modest clothing for the first time.
“This is my debut show. Only in the past year have I been thinking about Islamic clothing,” she said. “I see girls and young women wanting to be fashionable but also wanting to be modest. Until recently they had to compromise on one or the other.”
Another factor in the growth of modest fashion was rising disposable incomes among young Muslims, Rahman added. “You see this very clearly in India, where spending power used to be the preserve of the elite, but now the middle class has risen up.”
Twins Ranna and Rasha Ahmed, who launched their label Hijab Star less than a year ago, also pointed to a generational shift. “Young Muslim women of our generation are much more interested in fashion than our mothers,” said Ranna.
On the catwalk, elegant models showed off outfits ranging from skinny trousers paired with close-fitting tunics and minimal hijabs to stunning all-encompassing black abayas with elaborate veils.
Watching the show, Nadia Amdanee said: “I’m French and I like to be fashionable, but I also know the limits my religion imposes. Now it’s possible to be really distinctive and stylish while being true to your faith.”
Not everyone at the expo was set on modesty. Zahra Pederson, who runs a personal training service called the Healthy Hijab, was gathering signatures in support of a campaign, Faces of Muslimah, to be launched after Ramadan to celebrate diversity among Muslim women.
“My religion is in my heart, not how I look,” she said, wearing an outfit considerably more revealing than most at the show. “If you look at me, you wouldn’t know I’m a Muslim. But I pray five times a day, and I’ll fast over Ramadan. You can’t judge my actions on what I look like.”
Some of Britain’s top model agencies colluded to fix prices charged to retailers, fashion brands and other customers, the competition regulator has alleged. FM Models, Models 1, Premier, Storm and Viva agreed to exchange competitively sensitive information, including future prices, from April 2013 to March 2015, the Competition and Markets Authority alleged. In some cases, agencies agreed a common approach to pricing, the CMA added.
The allegations affect agencies at the pinnacle of the British modelling industry. Premier was the agency that launched Naomi Campbell’s career, Storm discovered Kate Moss and Cara Delevingne. Models 1 have represented Sophie Dahl and Yasmin Le Bon while Viva’s models include Stella Tennant and Natalia Vodianova.
The agencies allegedly used the Association of Model Agents trade association as a vehicle for price coordination when their representatives controlled the AMA’s managing council. The association circulated regular “AMA alerts” encouraging agencies to reject fees offered by customers and negotiate higher payments, the CMA said.
The CMA published its provisional findings after an investigation that began in March 2015. The regulator carried out dawn raids on agencies’ offices, interviewed staff and seized computer hard drives and files last year in operations that stunned the industry.
If the agencies are found to have broken the law they could be fined up to 10% of annual global revenues. Their directors could be fined, barred from running a company for 10 years and, in the worst cases, jailed.
Stephen Blake, the senior director of the CMA’s cartels and criminal group, said: “The allegations concern prices charged to a range of customers, including high street chains, online fashion retailers and consumer goods brands. The CMA alleges that these five model agencies sought to achieve higher prices in negotiations with their customers by colluding instead of competing.”
The CMA said it would consider statements from the agencies and the AMA before deciding whether they had broken the law.
Kirsty McGregor, news editor at trade publication Drapers, said: “It’s a can of worms that has been opened up. Retailers could feasibly decide to sue whichever agency they were working with because the CMA has done the groundwork for them in gathering evidence.”
The investigation is the CMA’s first into Britain’s creative industries. It is more used to deciding on less glamorous matters such as the state of retail banking and whether Poundland’s takeover of 99p stores hurts consumers. Blake said the creative sector was an important part of the economy that needed vigorous competition to operate effectively.
A source at an agency not involved in the investigation said: “We are not supplying a commodity. You’re representing a model and they are all different and they are all human beings and they are self-employed so [fees are] not a straightforward proposition.”
The CMA spent six months gathering information before deciding in October to proceed with a full inquiry. The main investigation ended in March and the watchdog has spent the past two months assessing evidence before publishing its findings.
The agencies and the AMA have about three months to submit their responses. The CMA will hope that at least one agency decides to cooperate early in return for a more lenient punishment. It is also offering up to £100,000 to people whose evidence helps the investigation.
The AMA’s website says its council meets regularly to discuss industry matters and promotes the interests of its members and their models. It operates a code of practice covering health, wellbeing and financial arrangements for models.
Models 1, Premier, Storm and Viva did not respond to requests for comment. FM ceased trading this year. The AMA was based at FM’s address and is chaired by FM’s co-founder Laurie Kuhrt, according to its website. A phone number on the website did not work.
As the co-founder of an ethical, feminist brand, I think it’s great to see press coverage denouncing the use of sweatshop labour. It’s my job to be up to speed on depressing statistics. Like the fact that 40,000 fingers are lost in China’s Pearl River Delta factories, or that thousands of cotton farmers in India kill themselves every year. However, fast fashion is big business, and because it’s not fun or glamorous to think about, these things aren’t common knowledge.
The workers who created the coveted new designs at Beyoncé’s Ivy Park range have allegedly been living and working in terrible conditions. Ivy Park has vigorously defended itself against the claims, but across the fashion industry in general many workers are paid pennies an hour, and living and sleeping in cramped compounds – no one can deny the level of exploitation that is endured for the sake of leisurewear. So to pin the blame solely on Beyoncé is absurd, and perhaps yet another example of the double standards that women of colour face in the fashion industry.
It was the Sun, that stalwart champion of women and the working classes, that took it upon itself to report on this latest case of poorly paid workers, and to attack Beyoncé for it. The very same paper celebrated Kylie Jenner’s proclamation that she was feminist, and covered her plans to do another collaboration line with Topshop only two weeks earlier. Slamming a woman of colour and then celebrating the same career trajectory of a white woman as aspirational – for some this may sound all too familiar.
Picking on the alleged cruelty behind Beyoncé’s new line of leotards as a personal failing of hers distracts us from the larger issue at hand. While people would be right to note the irony of a brand that commodifies “empowerment” yet is made by women on a poverty wage (80% of garment makers are women, after all), the icon isn’t to blame – it’s our entire fashion industry.
Although we could interpret the remarks of Phillip Green, the Topshop boss, that Beyoncé’s long and “involved” co-partnership in Ivy Park meant she would be aware of the supply chain, in reality there are dozens of layers of bureaucracy enabling people at the top to maintain a clear conscience. Retailers use increasingly complicated webs of outsourcing, middle managers and contractors before their designs get to suppliers. Factories like the one at Rana Plaza, Bangladesh, which collapsed, killing more than a thousand people, are hired out and populated with workers who will never know the lives of comfort enjoyed by the customers they are dying to make garments for. And retailers often don’t know who is making their clothes, or they are assured by further outsourcers that the ethical conditions suffice.
It would also be naive to assume that Beyoncé is any different from most stars or designers at the top of a big brand campaign. A quick look inside most “special range” labels will show clothing made in Bangladesh, the country with the highest density of sweatshops in the world. In fact, unless your label explicitly states otherwise, your clothes were probably made in a sweatshop. Whether in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka or even Leicester, underpaid workers in poor conditions make most of the clothes we wear.
Our alienation from that labour is the problem, and dazzling branding can put us all off the scent. The genesis of our clothes in a horrendous factory is hard to imagine when a package arrives as if from nowhere, wrapped in beautiful tissue, on our doorsteps. Branding sells us ideas of empowerment, or tricks us into thinking that a product represents more than it actually does.
Though fashion is undeniably a feminist issue, feminism is too often treated as a club that white, middle class people (Sun writers included) get to police. In reality, our relationships with capitalism are all complicated and problematic to varying degrees. When Philip Green is given a knighthood and feted as a billionaire business mogul, others could be forgiven for responding to the lure of a collaboration with him. Beyoncé might not have done much to change this situation as an individual, but we have the power as consumers to challenge all brands, and the systems that profit from exploitation.
The solution lies in supporting brands that do things differently. Like ones that put principles about the empowerment of customers together with the empowerment of female garment makers. It works for our company, anyway.
Buy from brands where you can see the face of a person who made an item. There’s a reason we take portraits of the women who make our clothes and get them to sign their clothes tags. Because if you don’t look after the people growing lemons, then lemonade tastes sour – no matter how much corporate sugar is added, or whoever’s idea it was to make it.
Denmark based Better World Fashion is currently making recycled leather jackets for the backers of its successful Kickstarter campaign. Each jacket is made from around two to three old leather jackets sourced from Scandinavian NGOs. Customers get 50% off a new jacket when they return their old one so it can be recycled again, and an app is under development which will allow customers to tell their jacket’s story. The leather industry is one of the most toxic industries in the world because of the chemicals, water and waste involved
Across the African continent second-hand clothes from developed countries are a mainstay of many informal traders, dominating local market stalls. East Africa alone imported $151m of second-hand clothing last year, most of which was collected by charities and recyclers in Europe and North America.
In February, however, the East African Community (EAC), an intergovernmental organisation, proposed a ban on imported used clothes and shoes. The aim is to encourage local production and development within member countries: Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda.
In the 1970s, east Africa’s clothing manufacturing sector employed hundreds of thousands of people, but when the debt crisis hit local economies in the 1980s and 1990s, local manufacturing struggled to compete with international competition and factories were forced to close. Today, the small sector remaining is geared towards production for exports.
Many orthodox economists disagree with banning imports because it goes against the principles of free trade. Rather than having the freedom to choose imported used clothing, east African consumers will have to buy higher priced local goods or new clothes imported from Asia. 
Increasing the cost of clothing will hit east Africa’s many low-income consumers, but the shock effect could be reduced if a ban was imposed gradually. If a tax on used clothing imports was introduced before an outright ban, this could subsidise local production and increase local manufacturing capacity.
A revitalised local market would ultimately boost the EAC’s economy by providing more jobs than the second-hand sector while retaining money that currently goes to Europe and the US to pay for second-hand imports.
It is important to emphasise, however, that turning off the supply of used clothing alone will not enable the growth of local manufacturing. The proposed ban on imports doesn’t include new clothing imports from outside the EAC. While foreign garments will be more expensive than used clothes, they are likely to be cheaper than locally manufactured clothes as has been found in South Africa. Efforts to ban used clothing imports are therefore unlikely to be beneficial for the local economy unless there are similar controls on new clothing imports. This would require the strengthening of customs and borders.
Clothing manufacturers in east Africa face other challenges. If countries such as Kenya are to revitalise their clothing industry, which once employed an estimated 500,000 people and now only has around 20,000 workers, then the EAC needs to promote industrial policies.
These might include improving communication, transport infrastructure and power supplies to enhance distribution and avoid delays in production; providing tax relief for factories; and offering export incentives. Links could also be established with east Africa’s cotton growing sector to improve its sustainability and help ensure a reliable local supply of raw materials.
Successful nations such as China and South Korea did not emerge from poverty by becoming dependent on exports from the west. Instead they protected domestic markets. Second-hand clothes may be more affordable, but trading in them reinforces an unequal relationship between haves and have-nots in the global economy.
If east African leaders want to do more than maintain the status quo they need to take bold decisions, even if this means sometimes taking decisions that might be unpopular with international advocates of free trade. The intention of the ban and the goal of promoting industrialisation in the east African region is commendable, but for it to be successful more needs to be done to support industry and to break the cycle of dependency.
Dr Andrew Brooks is the author of Clothing Poverty: The Hidden World of Fast Fashion and Second-hand Clothes
Its high street stores are meccas of overpriced tat with piles of cuddly Nemo fishes, plastic lightsabres and polyester princess outfits that send girls into a frenzy.
With recent cartoon blockbusters such as Frozen, Disney has tightened its hold over children’s hearts but now it is targeting their parents too, by pitching a clothing and homeware empire aimed squarely at adults.
“We did a lot of consumer research and discovered there was huge demand for adult product from Disney,” said Francesca Gianesin, who heads up fashion and lifestyle for the Europe, Middle East and Asia region for Disney Consumer Products. “When we see a movie, the first thing we think is will there be an emotional connection? What is it men and women would like to feel by wearing pieces of that movie?”
The division is already enjoying a strong run, with sales up 13% to $4.5bn (£3bn) last year as cinema-goers snapped up Frozen, Avengers and Star Wars-related T-shirts, toys and lunch boxes. But the target audience is not the fancy dress party goer – at the clothing and homeware event Disney held at Somerset House last week there wasn’t a pair of Mickey Mouse-style suspender shorts or a Cinderella costume with battery-operated lights in sight.
Gianesin is wearing a Fausto Puglisi tunic inspired by the Captain America franchise, and is channelling superhero rather than Disney princess. “It’s about empowerment because I’m a superhero,” the Italian explained. “I’m wearing Captain America and I’m a woman, and I want to be seen as strong.”
More than 1,000 fashion industry professionals trooped to the event at Somerset House, a glamorous neoclassical building on the Strand in central London, which with its cobbled square and dancing fountains is often a hangout during London fashion week.
In an industry always hungry for new ideas, Disney serves up a huge archive for fashion folk to plunder: from the drawings that were the genesis of classic 1930s and 1940s animations such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Fantasia and Bambi to storyboards and props from the most recent Marvel films.
Enthusiasm for the event was underlined by key figures such as Sandra Choi, creative director of Jimmy Choo, and Geoffroy de La Bourdonnaye, president of Chloé, taking part in a panel debate on the “power of storytelling”.
It is only the second time Disney has courted the fashion industry in this way, with last year’s show based on mock-ups created by Disney designers. This year several galleries were packed with the Disney-inspired output of high-end clothing designers ranging from Preen to Anya Hindmarch and Marc Jacobs as well as more accessible fashions such as a £145 pair of tiger-print Reebok trainers, inspired by its Jungle Book remake.
Disney grants character licences for use on everything from toys to clothing and food, earning royalties on the wholesale or retail price. Its hottest properties include Frozen, Mickey and Minnie, Marvel’s The Avengers and Spider-Man – and, lest we forget, the Disney Princesses. The broad appeal of Disney is clear: its own stores sell a pair of Cinderella “light up” shoe for £16, while a bespoke pair, decorated with thousands of Swarovski crystals, can be ordered from Jimmy Choo for just under £3,000.
Gianesin has reorganised her staff to create a Disney Living team, signalling an ambition to conquer the fragmented homewares market, with its characters ripe for use on everything from cushions to crockery and tea towels. Walt Disney logged the colours used to paint each character in its now classic animations, handing the company a paintbox filled with shades such as “Scat cat” purple (from The Aristocats) and “shine on ice” from Bambi.
Lorna Hall, head of market intelligence at trend forecaster WGSN, said demand for “novelty and nostalgia done well” should not be underestimated. “There is a constant need for newness and storytelling in a fashion market that is quite stagnant at the moment,” she explained. “Disney is an iconic brand and part of the story of how we have grown up. There are lots of stories for brands to play with.”
With a market value of $170bn, Walt Disney’s other interests include TV channels as well as the famous theme parks and film studios. Its arsenal of film rights was boosted by the purchase of Lucasfilm, the company behind Star Wars, in 2012, having swallowed Pixar, the animation firm behind Toy Story, and Marvel Comics in the 2000s.
“Whether you have children or not, it’s all about the emotional connection,” added Gianesin. “Luxury brands create new trends that move through the pyramid from luxury to trend-market to mid-market to mass market, even discount. We are part of pop culture. There are so many properties and characters that are timeless and relevant to different consumers.”
The British Fashion Council has announced plans to revamp its annual fashion awards, with an emphasis on global fashion. In the words of the BFC chair, Natalie Massenet, it will be “bigger and better”, with an emphasis on glitz.
Previously called the British fashion awards, the ceremony has been renamed the Fashion awards and will take place on 5 December at the Royal Albert Hall, London. In its new, souped-up surroundings, the awards are being described as to the UK’s answer to the Met Ball. Proceeds from the awards will go to the BFC’s education foundation, which helps fashion students who are struggling financially.
Sarah Mower and Meribeth Parker, the presidents of the BFC education pillar and trustees of the foundation, said: “The money raised will underpin work in schools, support apprenticeships and enable BA and MA students to continue their studies.”
Massenet said: “As a global industry, we should make a commitment to support talented people from all backgrounds to fulfil their dreams and access the best universities in the world. Over the next 10 years, our ambition is to raise and invest £10m to support young people.”
The awards began in 1989 and have always been considered the industry’s most prestigious event. Last year’s ceremony was typically star-studded, featuring Victoria Beckham, Naomi Campbell, Stella McCartney, Lady Gaga and Lily Allen. J.W.Anderson was named the menswear and womenswear designer of the year, the first time any designer had won both categories. Previous years have been eventful: in 2014, Anna Wintour received an outstanding achievement award from John Galliano in one of his first appearances after being sacked from Christian Dior in 2011.
“Don’t think about animals. Think about beauty,” says Russian fashion designer Igor Gulyaev, in his store brimming with fur coats.
“I guess that’s what it all comes down to, right?” muses presenter Reggie Yates, a natural in front of the camera, where he’s been since he was eight. He has a knack for acknowledgements that speak truth to the viewer without alienating his interviewees.
It’s a talent that served him particularly well in last night’s Inside a Billionaire’s Wardrobe (BBC2), which explored the sourcing of animal skins for an ever-growing luxury market. Yates first went to Siberia to follow hunters on the trail of wild sable (“It’s at moments like this,” says Yates, watching his companions chop enormous logs in sub-zero temperatures, “that you realise how much of a man you aren’t. Maybe I can help carry…”). They caught one and skinned it carefully to provide one fortieth of what it will take to make one of Igor’s coats. Undamaged, it will net them about $90 (£62). In the west, a wild sable coat can retail for over €1m (£777,000).
That wild sable, you could argue as his pale pink carcass was tossed out into the snow, was one of the lucky ones. Yates’s next stop was a fur farm in Kursk, where 70,000 mink, sables and other animals are bred and killed every year. They whirl around in tiny cages in endless desperation (“They need to move to keep warm,” explains the owner. “They are comfortable”). What conditions are like in China, where farmed fur can cost less than fake fur, does not bear thinking about.
But we must have our coats, our trimmings, our “entry-level” products, as one retail expert described the likes of Fendi’s pompoms for attaching to accessories, purses and handbags. So on we went to Australia to see crocodiles bred for their skins, and Indonesia to watch bagfuls of snakes caught by impoverished locals (“Usually I would pull its teeth out with a stick,” says one inquiringly, but Yates shakes his head), killed with a spike up the nose and sold for a few dollars to make goods that will eventually retail for thousands. The hunters have already noticed that some breeds are absent from formerly populous areas. Indonesian legislation is so threadbare that it makes any claims made by retailers to sustainability questionable. But you’ve got to remember that some of those animals may have ended up as the patches (of boa constrictor, crocodile, ostrich, python, elephant, sting ray, lizard and more) on one of just 10 pairs of customised trainers known as Brooklyn Zoos: maybe even on the very ones worn by Jay Z! Who wouldn’t say yes to a spike through the brain for that kind of glory?
Fashion has saved the Australian saltwater crocodile, hunted almost to extinction, by making it economically viable. Habitats are now preserved to supply eggs to farms. The hatchlings are reared til four, when their bellies are wide enough to be turned into handbags. Congratulations, humanity. Sustainable killing to service insane luxury has become the best we can hope for.
This wasn’t the flaying of the industry some will have hoped for, but it was the kind of good, clear, unsensationalist examination that perhaps encourages people to sit down and keep watching rather than bring the mental shutters down in horror. Let’s hope.
That talk brings us neatly to Camping (Sky Atlantic), the latest Julia Davis masterpiece, whose six-part tale of holiday misadventures came to an end last night. I was entirely broken by the opening few minutes of the finale, which began with Noel (David Bamber, whose penis I hope gets nominated for a Bafta) describing to Fiona how his wife “pooed away her entire body” and got steadily worse, which is to say better, which is to say worse, which is how things go in the barbarically knotted world of Davis. I remember only fragments after that: Tom’s haunted face as he was required to go down on Adam (“It’s – mmph – like a hammer!”). Kerry in her ketamine stupor. Adam shagging Fay with kidneys on his head. Robin sniffing Fay’s breasts. Separately. “Mummy’s stinky was bald” briefly replacing Hunderby’s “bubbly milk” as the worst thing I have ever heard until “Her urethra’s very fat and raw”. I laughed until my own was in danger of giving way and then, abruptly, as Fiona grabbed Robin’s hand as she sobbed in the wake of his confession, I cried. Oh, the humanity.
She’s an appalling genius, that Davis. I shall need a holiday to recover. Not camping.
More than £25m was paid out from BHS to its owner, Retail Acquisitions, in the 13 months between the department store’s sale and its collapse into administration, the Guardian has learned.
Almost 11,000 jobs are at risk after BHS called in administrators on Monday, the UK’s biggest high street failure since the collapse of Woolworths in 2008.
Retail Acquisitions and billionaire tycoon Sir Philip Green, the former owner of BHS, now face serious questions over their role in the 88-year-old company’s downfall.
MPs called for the government to launch an inquiry into the collapse of BHS, with Green’s handling of the retailer labelled as the “unacceptable face of capitalism”.
BHS has been left with a pension deficit of £571m, despite Green and his family collecting £586m in dividends, rental payments and interest on loans during their 15-year ownership of the retailer.
The Pensions Regulator has confirmed that it is investigating BHS, suggesting that it is considering whether to force Green to contribute to the pension scheme. The state-backed Pension Protection Fund is already in talks to bail out the pension scheme, although this will lead to members under the age of 60 suffering a cut to their benefits of at least 10%.
In addition, sources with knowledge of BHS’s finances have told the Guardian that more than £25m was paid from BHS to Retail Acquisitions in the past 13 months. This included £2.8m in management fees, £2.1m in salaries and wages, £11m in legal and professional fees and £10m in interest payments.
The man behind Retail Acquisitions is Dominic Chappell, a former racing driver who has been declared bankrupt twice. Chappell owns 90% of Retail Acquisitions, which bought BHS for £1 from Green in March 2015.
The payments include a loan of £8.4m to Retail Acquisitions, taken out in March 2015, which has already been reported by the Guardian. This is part of the professional fees.
About £7m of the £10m of interest payments is understood to have been passed on to investment firm Grovepoint for a loan taken out to support BHS.
Duff & Phelps has been appointed as administrator to BHS and will keep stores open as it tries to find a buyer. It insisted that staff will be paid as planned on Friday.
Anna Soubry, the business minister, said in parliament that the government “stands ready to offer its assistance” if a buyer cannot be found. This includes helping workers to find new jobs through the Jobcentre Plus’ Rapid Response Service.
However, a string of MPs called for the government to investigate whether there had been any impropriety in the downfall of BHS.
Referring to the conduct of Green, Angela Eagle, the shadow business secretary, said: “In this situation it appears this owner extracted hundreds of millions of pounds from the business and walked away to his favourite tax haven, leaving the Pension Protection Scheme to pick up the bill.”
Richard Fuller, the Conservative MP, said leaving the taxpayer to pick up the pension scheme through the PPF was the “unacceptable face of capitalism” and there were “reputational questions” for Green to answer. The tycoon is about to take delivery of a new £100m 300ft yacht.
Iain Wright, chairman of the BIS committee, said that “something is gravely wrong” for the BHS pension scheme to be facing a deficit and 11,000 jobs to be at risk when Green is understood to have collected millions from the business.
Soubry insisted the government would take action if it found evidence of wrongdoing.
The Pensions Regulator said in a rare statement that it would look at whether it can use its “anti-avoidance powers” to get money injected into the pension scheme, most likely from Green. The tycoon is thought to have offered to put £80m into the scheme, including £40m in cash and a £40m loan secured against BHS assets. However, the regulator is thought to want a bigger contribution, potentially as much as £300m.
A spokesperson for the regulator said: “We can confirm that we are undertaking an investigation into the BHS pensions scheme to determine whether it would be appropriate to use our anti-avoidance powers.
“Such cases are complex. There is a clear process that must be followed and this can sometimes take a considerable amount of time. We are unable to provide a running commentary on case investigations, or confirm the targets of our investigation.”
BHS fell into administration after failing to secure the emergency funding it needed to pay rent and wages.
Chappell held talks all weekend with Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct about the sportswear retailer buying BHS, which has 164 shops. However, the talks broke down.
Sports Direct could now try to buy BHS stores from the administrators. Duff & Phelps is already understood to have had more than 30 expressions of interest in buying BHS. A source close to the process said at least two of these were “serious people”.
BHS has more than £1.3bn of debts, including the pension scheme. Accountants have previously estimated that creditors would get just 1.23p for every pound if BHS collapsed, meaning landlords, clothing suppliers and staff could lose millions of pounds.
Trade unions described the collapse of BHS as devastating. John Hannett, the Usdaw general secretary, said: “This is devastating news for the employees of BHS and we urge the company to change their attitude to trade unions and begin a dialogue with us at this difficult and worrying time.”
Green declined to comment while Chappell did not return calls or messages seeking comment on the payments.
In a letter to employees on Sunday night, Chappell said: “It is with a deep heart that I have to report, despite a massive effort from the team, we have been unable to secure a funder or a trade sale.
“I would like to say it has been a real pleasure working with all of you on the BHS project, one I will never forget. You all need to keep your heads held high, you all have done a great job, but remember that it was always going to be very, very hard to turn around.”
How an ostentatiously ugly Australian boot defied fashion’s laws of gravity
On Wednesday, in the Jewish Museum in north London, I overheard a guide telling an American couple: “Then there’s Peter Sellers, he was Jewish too, you know. His father wasn’t but his mother was, so he has the bloodline.” “The bloodline is what counts,” said the American woman.
It had never occurred to me that Sellers was Jewish, or for that matter not Jewish. That kind of knowingness has come to me quite late in life. (“Yehudi Menuhin! No! Really?”) Half a century and more ago, when the time came for me to be measured for my first suit, my mother and I naturally found ourselves among the measuring tapes and courteous assistants of Montague Burton’s shop on the high street.
I didn’t know that the surname on the shop front, the little “Montague” stuck into the curlicue “B” like a ticket in a hatband, had probably first been spotted by the suit-maker on a pub window, advertising pale ales and stout in embossed white letters. I had no idea that this remarkable man, the founder of the biggest bespoke tailoring business the world has ever seen, was born Meshe David Osinky in the pogrom-ravaged Russian province of Kovno (now part of Lithuania) in 1885, to turn up alone in Yorkshire with only a few words of English at the age of 15.
It wasn’t that he kept his Jewishness secret. As the catalogue to the Jewish Museum’s new exhibition on the rag trade tells us, persons unknown scratched the word “Jew” on the windows of Burton branches in Manchester, Northampton and London soon after war broke out in 1939. In a note to the police, Montague Burton said he would have relished the chance to add the detail “… and proud of it” – as indeed he was, writing once that “the Jew has given the world the basic ethical and spiritual values, the cream of civilisation”.
But other than the window-scratchers (thought by Burton’s general manager to be a “Nazi-fascist organisation … financed from Germany”), nobody who knew seems to have much minded, and many people, especially those who lived far from his factories in Yorkshire and Lancashire and his home in Harrogate, never knew in the first place.
We missed an astonishing story. The dark suit that I tried on a few weeks after our measuring visit – I have a feeling it cost £12 – was made by an industrial organisation that in the same year, 1960, turned out 1,739,397 made-to-measure garments that, when jackets and trousers were put together, and omitting a few waistcoats from the picture, became roughly equivalent to 850,000 men’s suits. That was Burton’s peak postwar year, and perhaps one of those times (Burton’s biographer is fuzzy on the point) when Burton could claim to be clothing about a fifth of the British population. Suits last a long time – I waited four years for a second one – so the calculation is more complicated than it looks. More certainly, the firm provided a quarter of British military uniforms worn in the second world war.
Everything about the firm shouted ambition. Its rubric “the tailor of taste” was almost a national catchphrase. In Leeds, it owned the largest clothing factory in Europe and the world’s largest canteen – at a single sitting, 8,000 workers could enjoy fish and chips, with fruit pie and custard to follow.
In terms of employment, it was among Britain’s six biggest companies. No other business in the world had a bigger chain of textile shops – Burton’s had around 600 – and few shops of any kind were as distinct in their appearance. Ranked by facades that descended in importance from Portland stone through polished granite to white terracotta, they stood out among the jumbled Victorian architecture of industrial Britain like beacons of modernity. Many are now listed buildings. One or two still house the billiard halls that the teetotal Montague Burton liked to house above his shops, in the belief that they kept young men from drinking.
The roots of this cultural as well as commercial phenomenon lay far away in Tsarist Russia, where Jews had been largely confined to the zone known as the Pale of Settlement and restricted there to making a hard living from trades such as tailoring, cobbling and cabinet making. Of the 150,000 to 200,000 Jews who fled to Britain between 1881 and 1914, many simply transferred their skills to the sweatshops of London; others, however, settled near the Yorkshire wool industry, where a Methodist tailor, Joseph Hepworth, had begun to sell his wares directly from his Leeds factory to the public through a chain of ready-made clothes shops.
Osinky/Burton wasn’t the only trader to take the idea an important stage further by adding a bespoke alternative to the suit on the hanger. Nor was he the cheapest; by the 1920s plenty of tailors were offering suits priced in shillings – “the 30-bob suit” – and not guineas. But no rival had his dedication to organisation, salesmanship and publicity. He transformed the look of the nation.
“We are justly proud in having made a considerable contribution towards making Britain the best dressed country in the world, so far as men are concerned,” he wrote in 1933, adding, perhaps just a little questionably, “The caste of dress which used to separate class from class, can be said to have disappeared in my lifetime.”
He was knighted in 1933. He liked to read, preferring George Eliot to Dickens on account of “her studies of the little human weaknesses”, and mourning the fact that John Galsworthy had no successor to describe “the newer and more vigorous life” of the outer London suburbs such as Wembley. He thought of himself as “a modernist – almost a vandalist” for preferring the sight of a spotless food factory to “derelict abbeys” and “crumbling cathedrals”. He believed in the League of Nations, a happy workforce and endowing chairs at universities.
His had been a very long journey from the oppression and poverty of Kovno. His empire survived for another two or three decades after his death in 1952 and then, after diversifications into women’s wear and the merciless assault of jeans, it began to crumble. Today, the Topman chain is the Burton family’s last significant legacy in retail. I am proud to have worn one of his suits.
Moses, Mods and Mr Fish: the Menswear Revolution, is at the Jewish Museum, London NW1, until 19 June
In contrast to big production fashion campaigns, JW Anderson’s for SS16 was a lesson in delicate minimalism. Featuring one single postage stamp image, shot in a 1960s Nova magazine style by Jamie Hawkesworth (Miu Miu), it existed as a simple form in a sea of complicated visual messages. Well now Anderson has hit peak “object d’art” and turned the piece into an actual stamp. It’s being sold as a set of 10 costing £15 each and is available from its official website. We’re buying in bulk for our Christmas cards.
Asos is to spend £2m of the cash saved by closing its Chinese business on boosting operations in the UK, US and Europe.
Shares in the online fashion retailer rose more than 7% to £36.47 on Tuesday after it said UK sales increased 25% in the six months to 29 February and it was on track to achieve expected full-year sales and profits.
“I’m pleased with progress on a number of fronts. These results demonstrate improving momentum in the business,” said Nick Beighton, the chief executive who took over from co-founder Nick Robertson last year.
Pre-tax profits rose 18% to £21.2m as group sales climbed 21% to £667.3m in the half year despite £2.7m of losses at the Chinese operation, which Asos last week announced it would be exiting.
Beighton said Asos was combining technical innovation, such as using Snapchat and Instagram to contact customers, with improvements in service and pricing to win over shoppers. In the UK, 70% of Asos’s traffic and half its sales now come via mobile devices – up from virtually zero five years ago. The fastest growing sales channel is through its own iPhone app.
The next development in service is to offer every European customer free returns by the end of April – taking the service to 29 countries rather than the five, including the UK, in which it is now offered. The company will also be taking the physical version of its customer magazine into Germany - its third market after the UK and France.
Beighton said it had not been a mistake to set up a local Chinese operation, despite the £10m cost of exiting the venture after three years of losses.
Asos initially spent £9m launching the local service in 2013, £3m more than it predicted, and the unexpected costs contributed to a slump in its share price in 2014. The company’s shares are now valued at just over half the peak of about £70 enjoyed in February 2014.
But Beighton said: “A business like ours needs to make investments, learn from those investments and be brave enough to back ones that work and change ones that don’t work. There are better opportunities in markets where we have got proven opportunity ahead of us and can really deploy capital in a better way.”
Technology is revolutionising the way we use and relate to clothes. Last year, Google and Levi’s announced they were partnering on Project Jacquard to develop a fabric that can send commands to your smartphone via gestures like tapping or swiping. Ralph Lauren already offers a t shirt for a cool $295 (£210) that sends workout data to an iPhone, and Lady Gaga has brought 3D printing to the red carpet.
But beyond the super hi-tech, others are working on merging technology and fashion to address environmental concerns.
Behind the catwalk supermodels and glossy magazine covers lies a seriously resource-intensive industry with heavy impacts. The fashion industry has been linked to pollution of streams and rivers with hazardous chemicals leaked from factories and is a contributor to bulging landfills. 
Some companies are already confronting these problems. Seattle-based startup Evrnu is attempting to tackle textile waste with its patent-pending technology that turns old clothing into fibres for new clothing, while Bionic Yarn is making denim from ocean plastic. Both see the fashion sense in turning “waste” into a viable resource for the industry’s production. 
Other companies are turning their attention to advancing eco-friendly dye technology. DyeCoo for example, claims to have created “the world’s first water-free and process chemical-free dyeing solution”.
But can these solutions be scaled up and how should the fashion industry be using technology to reduce its impacts?
On Tuesday 12 April 4-5pm BST join a panel of experts in the comments section below, to discuss the potential for tech to disrupt fashion and make it more sustainable. 
Which tech innovations should we have our eyes on? Will these advances forever be confined to research labs and crowdfunding pages or are the big brands on board? 
You can submit questions for the panel in advance using the form below or tweeting them to @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB.
Gucci has made significant strides towards gender neutrality as well as a simplification of its business model by announcing that it will combine menswear and womenswear in one standalone show, reports the New York Times.
“It seems only natural to me to present my men’s and women’s collections together. It’s the way I see the world,” creative director Alessandro Michele said. “I believe it will give me the chance to move towards a different kind of approach to my storytelling.” Michele has been creative director since January 2015 and has used models of both genders in his shows as well as the label’s ad campaigns.
As well as this move towards gender neutrality, Gucci cited reasons of economic streamlining. “Moving to one show each season will significantly help to simplify many aspects of our business. Maintaining two separate, disconnected calendars has been a result of tradition rather than practicality,” said chief executive of the brand Marco Bizzarri. The first show of this kind is expected to take place at Gucci’s new headquarters in Via Mecenate, Milan, in 2017.
The move comes in the wake of Burberry, Tom Ford and Vetements moving towards a one show-per-season policy, and just a day after Anthony Vaccarello was announced as the new creative director of Saint Laurent.
Anthony Vaccarello has been named as the creative director of Saint Laurent, confirming what had been suspected with the fashion industry. He was widely expected to replace Hedi Slimane, who left the house on Friday.
In a statement, Francesca Bellettini, president and CEO of Saint Laurent, praised Vaccarello’s “modern, pure aesthetic … Anthony Vaccarello impeccably balances elements of provocative femininity and sharp masculinity in his silhouettes.”
Vaccarello, a 33-year-old Belgian-Italian, is a logical successor to Slimane. Like the French designer, he has a penchant for rock-inspired glamour. If Slimane’s comes through the prism of youth culture – with babydoll shapes and punky tiaras – Vaccarello’s is slicker and more grown-up. His last eponymous collection was largely black, with skinny trousers, short skirts, blazers and high heels dominating. The Versus collection had a hipper vibe with slouchy outerwear and camisoles.
Vaccarello might not be a household name as yet, but his rise – largely due to a confident, distinct aesthetic – has been swift. He began showing his own label in 2011. He started working with Versus Versace in 2013, with a capsule collection, and became creative director last year. He was early on the see-now-buy-now trend, with clothes on catwalk at the Versus Versace September show available to buy immediately afterwards.
Versus Versace is fast becoming a finishing school for talent to come through before moving on to further success. Christopher Kane and JW Anderson have both worked with the brand. Donatella acknowledged this in her statement. “Their time on Versus Versace led to them making a huge advancement in their design career,” she said. “I’m proud that Versus can be such a remarkable global platform for emerging design talent.”
This position for Vaccarello may be the highest that a Versus alumni has attained. Slimane’s four years at Saint Laurent brought huge commercial success for the house. Revenue grew from around £282m in 2011 to £564m in 2014. Vaccarello’s challenge is to put his mark on the brand while keeping the fanbase Slimane has developed.
The Italian economist Guido Brera warns we’re all complicit in a great deceit. Millennials have been robbed of what might have been previously considered their rights, including free education and an affordable place to live; instead they are distracted and satiated (to varying degrees) by fast food, fast tech and fast fashion.
This trio comes at a massive ecological and human cost. Aiming to be part of the solution, retailer H&M launches World Recycle Week on 18 April. It plans to capture 1,000 tons of unwanted clothes during the week. Popstar M.I.A. will launch a video for the brand on environmental impact , and the brand will invite customers to drop off old clothes so H&M can “recycle them and create new textile fibre, and in return you get vouchers to use at H&M. Everybody wins!”
Do they? Crunch the numbers and H&M’s claims seem fanciful. Technical issues with commercial fibre recycling mean that only a small percentage of recycled yarn is used in new garments. Using publicly available figures and average clothing weights, it appears it would take 12 years for H&M to use up 1,000 tons of fashion waste.
Meanwhile if 1,000 tons is recycled, that roughly equates to the same amount of clothes a brand of this size pumps out into the world in 48 hours. Then there are the voucher schemes, which often fuel more purchasing.
I may be a fool to let my heart get crushed by corporate green marketing, but it’s not just the audacity I object to: it’s the timing. H&M’s Recycle Week clashes exactly with the grassroots Fashion Revolution campaign. This was founded by Derbyshire hat designer Cary Somers and ethical clothing maker Orsola de Castro to commemorate the anniversary of the Rana Plaza disaster.
They campaign on issues like living wages and transparency in the supply chain, but it’s kept brilliantly simple, keeping the spotlight on some of the most exploited workers on the planet.
Last April’s Fashion Revolution got huge traction on social media (124 million impressions of the hashtag alone). In particular everyone loved the #haulternatives, vloggers subverting the YouTube Hauler phenomenon (where young consumers show off their fast fashion purchases). Putting an ethical spin on things, haulers used vintage, fairtrade and charity shop buys.
H&M will now use the same idea for World Recycle Week. The brand insists this is a coincidence: Fashion Revolution is adamant that the clothing giant is trying to steal its thunder. “The outrage is actually that it is disrespectful,” says De Castro. “We’re remembering the carnage, not staging a carnival where people go around dressed in fashion waste.
“When you focus on pushing an initiative that’s about buying and consuming more, you do nothing to challenge the idea of garment workers as machines.”
To some this may sound an eccentric turf war, but it’s much more important than that. Fashion Revolution is one of the only chances an active engaged citizen – note the reprieve here from the term “consumer” – gets to challenge the fast food, fast tech, fast fashion, hegemony without interference from corporations. It must not be hijacked and greenwashed.
RIP chicks and totes. If the devil is in the detail – and in fashion it often is – then the devil is a weird animal placed nonsensically in a spring fashion shoot. Joeys, pigeons, flamingos, leopards – you name it, if it’s furry and undomesticated, it’s probably in a photoshoot, on a magazine cover or printed on a blouse this season. What do a baby kangaroo and a rat with wings tell us about spring fashion?
“I want to be able to have my family and have this normalcy and go see a play and not have the audience watching me watch the play,” says actor Jessica Chastain, another A-lister chasing the elusive train of normalcy by holding a baby kangaroo on the cover of a magazine. The natural makeup says one thing – pared-back, intimate, the “real me”. But why the joey? For one, kangaroos are good at fighting, and Chastain is quite vocal about gender inequality in the magazine interview; they are also family creatures (see the quote above); and terrestrial kangaroos are vegetarian, like Chastain. Plus, the longer you look at it, the more the two faces seem to merge. It’s quite hypnotic, really. So, you see, the joey makes absolute sense.
Gucci loves a weird animal, and a weird setting. Indeed, compared to last season’s campaign – models on skateboards in Berlin’s Hauptbahnhof station holding peacocks – “flamingos in a conservatory” is a relatively staid concept. But Gucci (by which we mean new Gucci, under the direction of Alessandro Michele) leans towards the kitsch and fantastical. Photographed and directed by Glen Luchford, who is famous for his exotic and cinematic imagery, it makes for an arresting (Instagrammable) image, something Gucci has down pat.
Other thoughts on the flamingos: according to SeaWorld, they have well-developed colour perception. Conversely, the models in this campaign appear to be visually impaired, so there’s a cheeky bit of role reversal. Maybe we are the flamingos looking at the models? Maybe the models are in a metaphorical zoo? Or maybe it’s as simple as Gucci likes birds. It’s anyone’s guess.
Not strictly true – one shoot, in US Harper’s Bazaar magazine, sees Kris Jenner in a circus tent with a massive lion in the background – but it has been a while since this arm of the big cat family has been properly represented in fashion. Here they are, though, printed on Kate Moss’s pyjamas for Equipment, and here is a model, lying on a tree like a leopard, in Marni’s spring campaign. Does the Equipment campaign buy into the adage that a leopard can’t change its spots (ie pyjamas will always be pyjamas)? Is this model lying in a tree like a leopard because she’s tired of life, fashion and the ground? Or is it all of those reasons? All good, all food for thought.
Finally, a concept we can get on board with: here are lots of models and non-models like Jourdan Dunn (model, British) and Karley Sciortino (a writer, once based in London). And here are some dalmatians (English literature’s favourite dog) and pigeons (our favourite bird). Dogs are a perennial in ad campaigns, but the pigeons? Well, US designer Kate Spade recently opened her flagship store in London; the obvious answer is that she’s trying to speak to us, the British public, about how on board she is with Britishness. The less obvious (but more likely answer) is that their dirty wings match fashion illustrator Robert W Richards’s tie. Still, quite fun.
Whistles, the high street fashion chain, has been bought by the Foschini Group in the latest move by a South African retailer into the British market.
Foschini, which last year bought Phase Eight in the UK, has acquired the 46 Whistles stores and its online business and will use the combined operations to expand in the northern hemisphere, the company said. It did not disclose the sale price.
Since the launch of Whistles as a women’s fashion brand in 1976 by husband-and-wife team Richard and Lucille Lewin, its fortunes have fluctuated. It was in the doldrums and perceived as frumpy in 2008 when Jane Shepherdson, formerly of Topshop, joined as chief executive with a 20% stake.
Shepherdson turned Whistles into a “Topshop for grownups”, targeting younger customers rather than the “yummy mummies” who had become its staple.
Shepherdson has kept her stake and will continue to run the business after the sale. Peter Davies, chairman of Whistles since 2008 and the former chairman of shoe retailer Clarks, has sold his stake.
Now the brand’s fans include the Duchess of Cambridge and Samantha Cameron and its clothes are stocked by Bloomingdale’s in the US and Harrods in the UK. Foschini said it wanted to expand the company, which added a menswear range in 2014, into new markets.
Doug Murray, Foschini’s chief executive, told Bloomberg News: “Whistles is an iconic brand and we see enormous growth potential for the brand in the UK and also internationally. We have a management team in place on that side and will start working with the Whistles team from today.”
South African retailers have been buying up European companies to reduce their reliance on the rand, which has tumbled over the past year. Truworths bought Office, the UK shoe chain, for £256m in December and Steinhoff backed out of a bid for Argos last week, preferring to buy Darty, the French electronics chain, for £673m.
Last year Steinhoff bought Pepkor, South Africa’s biggest retailer, which has launched Pep & Co as a discount clothing chain in the UK. Christo Wiese, South Africa’s fourth richest man who owns a big stake in Pepkor, last year paid £780m for a majority stake in New Look, the British fashion retailer.
Foschini bought Whistles from Mundur, an Icelandic investment company, Bloomberg said. Whistles was part of the retail empire controlled by Baugur, the Icelandic group that entered administration in 2009 during Iceland’s banking crisis. The UK chain was refinanced and became an independent company.
Gone are the days when sustainable fashion meant hemp shirts and ropey shoes. As designer Stella McCartney has shown, fashion can still be luxurious, beautiful and desirable, without wrecking the environment or exploiting workers. Witness her platform shoes with sustainable wood heels or her fur-free coats – albeit not at high-street prices. “Every industry has to be pushed; the fashion industry is no different,” she said in the documentary on the clothing business The True Cost.
Since the collapse of the Bangladeshi factory Rana Plaza in 2013, which killed more than 1,000 workers and injured about 2,500, some consumers are beginning to reject “sweatshop” fashion, and a shift towards more ethical practice is ultimately inevitable, commentators believe – though slow to arrive. “When a designer makes a decision in New York, in a matter of hours that affects people in Bangladesh,” says Sue Thomas, associate professor in fashion at Heriot‑Watt University in Scotland.
Sustainability and ethics lend themselves to postgraduate-level education, says Kate Fletcher, author and professor of sustainability, design and fashion at the London College of Fashion (LCF). “But it’s complex stuff – non-linear – and not happening yet in great numbers.” Despite environmental innovations, we’re still consuming clothes faster and wiping out any gains, she says. “But I don’t think any job in the future will exist without some element of sustainability.”
She teaches at the Centre for Sustainable Fashion, where postgraduates can study for a master’s in fashion futures. This was set up by Prof Dilys Williams within LCF in 2008 in response to the need to raise the profile of ethical fashion and bring the industry on board. As a designer herself, Williams wasn’t trained in ethics, environment or the politics and social impact of fashion, but she wants the next generation to be more savvy. “I wanted to create a master’s course in which these vital elements were addressed.”
Her postgraduates, says Williams, are welcomed by some within the industry. Some fashion houses even create new roles to accommodate them, she says: her students work at Alexander McQueen and Levi’s, while others are social entrepreneurs – one has set up the east London collective Here Today Here Tomorrow, and another established an eco village in Brazil.
It was an escalating need for trained professionals that led Heriot-Watt University to launch a new MSc in ethics in fashion – a course hailed by Simone Cipriani, head of the UN-supported Ethical Fashion Initiative, as “exactly what was missing in fashion education”. Today, he says, all major players in the fashion industry accept the need for ethical practice. Students on the course consider thorny issues such as consequences of unethical practice, and the role of the consumer in fashion ethics, and supply chain issues. On the MA in fashion at Goldsmiths, University of London, students look at the social, cultural and environmental impact of fashion, and alternative practices.
Within the industry, there’s proof that taking into account the impact on the planet can benefit a business, sometimes with contrary results. When clothing company Patagonia ran its “don’t buy this jacket” campaign, to encourage consumers to consider the environmental costs of manufacturing it, sales of the item rose. But fashion graduates have founded new upcycling businesses, luxury brands have embraced ethical fashion, while new brand Tom Cridland promises its shirts will last 30 years. But all this takes place in the glare of the high street and online, where t-shirts cost a fiver, and turnover is relentless. As everyone agrees, there’s still much more to be done.
“There’s a squeeze from all sides,” says Williams. “But universities must be about transforming ourselves and the world. We have a moral obligation and an incredible opportunity – a space where ideas can be explored and tested, and experiments undertaken without the constraints of an existing business.”
Fiona Fung worked in New York in pattern cutting and went on to study fashion design at Central Saint Martins, University of the Arts London (UAL). She graduated this year with an MA in fashion futures at the London College of Fashion, UAL.
“Everything you see in the news points to the way the fashion industry is changing. It’s so fast and often purely based on aesthetics: designers need to turn out four or more collections a year, with 30-50 ‘looks’; people consume too much and there’s never time to reflect on the materials or methods we use.
“This course taught me how to use imagination intelligently in design, while considering the environment. I chose it because I wanted the opportunity to explore new design research and the ethical implications. It made me look more at the design cycle – what about the afterlife of a garment?
“My final project looked at algae and how we could use this as a resource rather than petroleum-based products. Algae as a resource has many advantages – it “cleans” nitrogen and phosphorous in water, it removes CO2, it doesn’t use up arable land and it doesn’t overconsume resources in the way that other bioplastics or cotton do.
“There’s no doubt there are major challenges to introducing sustainability; the fashion industry has been the way it is for so long. Companies might not be interested in investing money and time into an area with no obvious commercial interest. It’s down to us to show people there are possibilities and then we can change mindsets – there’s a human side to the problem. As an industry, we have new challenges that require innovation.
“Design has an important role to play. Before the pace of fashion sped up, designers took time to consider and develop ideas before taking the product to market. We need to return to that, but it’s a topic some parts of the fashion industry are still keen to brush under the carpet.
“I do think it’s starting to change. We are in a sort of limbo at present: we are aware of the issues, but we don’t really know how to tackle the problems, as they’re so deep and complex.
“Ultimately, I’d like a role which allows me to look at design through an operational and material perspective, at how a can company improve the design process and how it can change operationally. I’m interested in the next steps for fashion.”
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at @GdnStudents – and become a member to receive exclusive benefits and our weekly newsletter.
Abracadabra! “Jean genie Lidl magics up £5.99 denims,” shouted the headline in a newspaper last weekend as it extolled the brilliance of the cut-price supermarket chain in once again undercutting its rivals.
The German retailer, it explained, was continuing its assault on the traditional supermarket giants by targeting the high street fashion-conscious with jeans selling for an astonishing £12 less than a similar pair in Tesco.
How could these retail wizards do it? The unchallenged line from Lidl was that its huge buying power was the answer. It was just good at doing deals.
But let us be clear. This is not magic. It is not Harry Potter making these jeans, it is a young woman in a factory in Bangladesh and one of the main reasons they are so cheap is that workers like her are paid as little as 2p for every pair they make.
Still, £5.99 is quite an achievement when even Primark – no slouches in the cost-cutting field – have only managed to get their lowest price down to £8. So how do they do it?
“Lidl surprises” is the slogan the supermarket currently uses to punningly flog its wares, but it is no surprise to discover that the firm, like many of the British high street retailers, does much of its clothes shopping in Bangladesh, where the minimum legal wage for a garment worker is 23p an hour.
Sure enough, when the new range launched on Thursday morning at Lidl’s more than 600 UK stores as part of the “We Love Denim” promotion – the word “love” denoted by a denim heart – the labels revealed Bangladesh as the source of the jeans. In a range of sizes and colours, they are dumped higgledy-piggledy in wire baskets at the rear of the store, but even Lidl’s most ardent fans would probably concede that no one seeks out the stores for a retail therapy experience, so there are a few pennies saved on display costs for starters.
The headline-grabbing £5.99 offering is actually a pair of “jeggings” – tight-fitting leggings that resemble jeans. The label says they have a “stylish denim effect”. Cotton-rich fabric (77%), with an elasticated waistband; they have a single button, a YKK zip, two back pockets and two at the front, held together with stitching, no rivets. There is no embroidery on the pockets.
This is all important. Every additional detail adds to the price of the finished item. A breakdown of costs at a Bangladeshi jeans factory published by Bloomberg in 2013 priced a zip at 10p, a button at 4p and rivets at 1p each. Embroidery added another 9p, the pockets 6p and the labels 7p. At these margins, every single penny counts, so it is no surprise to find that the jeggings are pared back to the bone.
But the Boyfriend Jeans, at £7.99, appear to be the real thing: four pockets plus that baffling little one inside the front pocket on the right of the body (it is a watch pocket, apparently). There are six belt loops, five rivets, three buttons and a YKK zip. And they are made from 100% cotton, the material being the most expensive element of the production process: in the range of £2.30 to £2.50.
There is thread to pay for too, for the stitching, which might be as much as 19p, and the finished pair will need to be washed, so if we are going to try to put a price on the materials we are probably looking around the £3.90 mark.
Now we need to assemble those materials. Luckily – for the buyer – that is not nearly as expensive.
Most of the workers in Bangladeshi garment factories are women and most are paid at the minimum legal wage of 5,300 takas a month (about £48). That is 23p an hour on an eight-hour, six-day, week. It is a fifth of the £230 a month estimated by the Asia Floor Wage Alliance to be the minimum required for a living wage back in 2013.
To accurately work out the labour cost, you need to know how many pairs of jeans the factory turns out a day. The available figures cover quite a broad range: research in India found workers in one factory averaging 20 pairs a day, while a different study in Tunisia found 33 pairs a day. It all depends on the quality and complexity of the design. In 2010 the Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights looked at Bangladesh and found a team of 25 workers turning out 250 pairs of jeans an hour – 10 per worker, or 80 per worker per day.
That means a minimum wage worker would be paid somewhere in a range between 2p and 9p for each pair of jeans they make, which is broadly in line with a 2011 study of Bangladeshi garment manufacture by the US consultancy O’Rourke Group Partners, which priced the labour costs for a polo shirt at 8p.
O’Rourke put the total factory costs per shirt at 41p: Bloomberg calculated its Bangladeshi jeans cost the factory 56p to make, and the factory added on 16p in profit.
Splitting the difference, we are now up to about £4.50. But we still need to ship the jeans, and there are warehouse charges and port fees, so we can stick on another 30p, taking us up to £4.80. And we still need to get them from the port to the store, so that’s another 50p. That gives us £5.30, but there is still VAT to go on top.
The grand total of £6.36 would bust the budget for the jeggings, but they use a little less material, and we have saved a few pennies on the buttons and rivets. That will make them quicker to turn out, so that is a bit off the labour costs. It might just about be possible to bring them in at £5.99 or they may be a loss leader: that happens. The jeans, meanwhile, are showing a profit of £1.63.
But this is where Lidl’s purchasing power has to kick in, because both the jeggings and the jeans are imported by middlemen, who sell on to the supermarket – respectively OWIM Gmbh, a German company, and Hong Kong-based Top Grade International Enterprise Ltd, which exports 30 million pieces a year from Bangladesh. Both need to take their cut. In the Bloomberg example, the middleman took a cut of £2. That is clearly out of the question here if Lidl is to turn a profit itself. And that is the reality of a £5.99 pair of jeans: everyone is squeezed, all down the line.
Times are tough. Customers demand the cheapest possible clothes. Lidl’s success is built on this: that is how it racked up £4bn of sales in 2014. It meets a need and it does so by putting the tightest possible squeeze on its suppliers. Lidl argues that it is aware of its responsibilities and is working to improve the living and working conditions of garment workers. It audits its factories, it says, but everyone does. It does not publish the results. Hardly anyone does.
Unusually, Lidl has experimented with a system of top-up bonuses for some workers, which is more than can be said for most of its rivals. But then, it really does need to.
Because when your business model is based on offering the lowest possible prices, someone has to subsidise that, and that someone is the worker stitching those jeans. Lidl does not buy its jeans from Bangladesh because Dhaka’s factories are the finest in the world: it does so because they pay their workers a pittance. And that, ultimately, is how it is possible to sell a pair of jeans for £5.99.
Born in London, Mary Quant , 82, studied at Goldsmiths College and became an apprentice couture milliner. In 1955, she and her husband opened Bazaar boutique on the King’s Road, London, and later a second store in Knightsbridge. In the mid-1960s she championed the miniskirt and created her own makeup line; in 1966, she was awarded the OBE for her contribution to the fashion industry.
When were you happiest?
When my son Orlando was born, on 4 November 1970.
Which living person do you most admire, and why?
The Queen, because she hasn’t put a foot wrong. I have met her on many occasions and I think she’s the wisest woman I’ve ever met.
What is the trait you most deplore in others?
Arrogance.
Property aside, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?
A silver E-Type Jag.
What is your most treasured possession?
My garden: I love all the nooks and crannies – everywhere you look, there is something different.
What is your screensaver?
My three grandchildren.
What would your super power be?
God.
If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?
My briard dog Ferdinand, who died five or six years ago.
Who would play you in the film of your life?
Tilda Swinton: she’s a bit taller than me but such a brilliant actress.
What did you want to be when you were growing up?
A designer and a tap dancer.
What is your favourite word?
Yes.
Which book changed your life?
None has changed my life, but there are many I have loved. My favourite is Little Women, which is heaven.
What is top of your bucket list?
Getting another Ferdinand.
What is your guiltiest pleasure?
I love those red Lindor chocolates.
What do you owe your parents?
Everything, although they always thought that my being a designer was very dicey. They were both teachers and highly academic.
What or who is the greatest love of your life?
My husband Alexander Plunket Greene – he died in 1990. I met him at Goldsmiths and he was a great wit and a dish: a 6ft 2in prototype for Mick Jagger and Paul McCartney rolled into one. What more could you want?
Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?
The Queen, Chanel, Picasso, Bailey, Thatcher, Oscar Wilde and Nureyev.
Which words or phrases do you most overuse?
“Oh Lord.”
If you could edit your past, what would you change?
Not much, I’ve had a lovely time.
If you could go back in time, where would you go?
To when Orlando was a child.
When did you last cry, and why?
When my cat died recently.
What is the closest you’ve ever come to death?
In an aeroplane that I thought was going to crash.
What do you consider your greatest achievement?
Breaking into America and being made a dame.
What song would you like played at your funeral?
We’ll Meet Again.
Growing up with afro hair can be traumatic, especially when white ideals of beauty are everywhere. But, says Emma Dabiri, black women are increasingly letting their natural hair out, and the ‘fro is becoming fashionable. But, she argues, they are still too often measuring their beauty by the yardstick of whiteness
Since 2012, when designer Hedi Slimane began his reboot of the Saint Laurent brand, the label has been closely linked with music. Whether that be the young indie bands which populated the front row of his shows to the chagrin of uptight fashion editors banished to the rows behind them, or the designs themselves which are frequently dosed with gig culture – Glastonbury wellies and Courtney Love tiaras were a feature of his last show in Paris. Advocates of the brand are often those who play music for a living, from Justin Bieber to Keith Richards.
So it was significant that at the Saint Laurent show in Paris on Monday evening – the second part of the brand’s fall collection which began in blockbuster gig fashion in LA last month – that there was no catwalk music at all. Instead, the soundtrack was simply the voice of Benedicte de Ginestous announcing the arrival of each of the outfits. “Numero un ... number one,” she declared in a tone at once overly dramatic but also compelling. The significance of this device was not lost on the audience seated on personalised chairs in marble-heavy salons – de Ginestous announced the numbers of each look for Yves Saint Laurent’s couture shows between 1977 and 2002.
If the catwalk bingo calling device and the mannered opera chairs paid homage to the house’s history, the clothes themselves were nine parts Slimane, to one part Yves Saint Laurent. Each of the 42 looks echoed one dominant idea – that of a fierce late 1980s party girl – with the odd nod to the label’s original hallmarks thrown in. The take-home image was that of a cocktail-minidress-wearing woman with slicked-back hair, heavy lipstick, sheer tights, a wide belt and an overly dramatic shoulder detail. Picture a woman dancing in a Roxy Music video and you get the starting point. Make her dress shorter, shinier, and razor cut to a millimetre of her breathing capacity, slot in the odd sequinned catsuit, biker jacket and puffball skirt and you have the full picture. The designer himself called the look a reference to classical editorial style, with slicked-back hair and red lips of a zillion Helmut Newton inspired magazine covers throughout fashion’s recent history.
Before the show began, guests were gossiping about the rumours that this will be Slimane’s last show for the brand, with designer Anthony Vaccarello hotly tipped to succeed him. But by the end of the show, the audience were wondering whether they had in fact seen the first couture show under Slimane. The brand announced that for this show it had reinstated the couture ateliers in Paris and Angiers – a plan Slimane has had for the house since taking the helm. He has also said that the reason he initially dropped the Yves from the branding was to eventually make some bandwidth and branding space for a reinstated couture line at some point. Moreover, this collection took place in a restored 17th-century mansion – L’hotel de Senecterre in Saint German which it is calling its new “couture house”. At the end of the show, it wasn’t clear whether the is was actually the end of the Slimane era, or simply the start of Slimane’s second act for Saint Laurent. The latter seems the more likely.
Super Sunday is a familiar concept in football, but it could also be applied to fashion this weekend. Paris fashion week boasted two agenda-setting shows to define a season – Balenciaga and Céline.
First up was Balenciaga on Sunday and the debut collection from its new artistic director, Demna Gvasalia. The Georgian-born designer is fashion’s current cult figure, as the lead designer of Vetements, the label making waves with disrupted streetwear – hoodies with overlong sleeves, shirts cut back to front. The question here was how a design sensibility that saw sweatshirts with the slogan “You fuck’n asshole” at the Vetements show on Thursday would transfer to an almost 100-year-old house that once clothed socialites and heiresses in ladylike elegance.
The answer came in a square room covered with white acoustic insulation, like that in a recording studio, in the basement of an anonymous white building. The expectant audience included Gucci designer Alessandro Michele and model Stella Tennant.
The first outfit was a checked skirt suit with exaggerated hips and shoulders up around the model’s neck. This was a very Gvasalia nod to Cristóbal Balenciaga’s signature midcentury sculptural shapes – making them slightly weird but still recognisable. It wasn’t remotely retro.
This was followed by cagoule-style jackets with Balenciaga written on the back of the hood, and oversize striped shoppers – both surefire hits with the social media generation. Models wore knee-length cord skirts, ski pants and over the knee PVC boots. Oversize bad-taste jumpers and floral patchwork dresses worn with candy-striped tights recalled more recent Balenciaga history, and the collections of Nicolas Ghesquière.
While the designs here were sometimes wilfully twisted – a trench with extra padding around the hips, or an off-the-shoulder coat – they all had some basis in the reality of what women wear now. There was an everydayness that felt modern. It was this factor that made for such a blisteringly desirable debut collection.
In an interview with Women’s Wear Daily earlier this year, Gvasalia said he has a “very product-oriented approach creatively”, industry speak for a designer who makes clothes rather than concepts. Backstage, the designer reiterated this idea, saying he wanted to make “relatable garments”. He was keen to emphasise the Balenciaga heritage. “I used his way of looking at things 360 degrees,” he said. “It is important to know the past in order to build the future.”
CEO Isabelle Guichot called Gvasalia “someone capable of reshuffling the cards” when he was appointed in October. This collection confirmed she was right.
If Gvasalia was a tough act to follow, Céline was always going to pull the crowds. It is a brand that has had the fashion industry in raptures since Phoebe Philo became creative director in 2008. This collection had elements familiar to her significant fanbase – there were tunics over wide bootleg trousers, oversize sweaters, tied trench coats and bags clutched in models’ hands. There was a functionality that chimed with Gvasalia’s – with a muted colour palette, flat shoes and party dresses with pockets worn over polo necks and leggings, eveningwear for those who feel the cold.
If that sounds straightforward, Philo is frequently less than crystal clear in her explanation of a collection. “It’s about possibilities,” she said, adding that there is “always a tactile process [when designing], but this time it showed more”. Wearing a dress over wide-legged white trousers, what she said may have been somewhat opaque but she did embody the simple chicness of her brand.
This is the first Céline show since rumours about the potential exit of Philo were quashed in February. A memo signed by Philo and Céline CEO Marco Gobbetti was leaked to the media, and states that the designer and brand were “more motivated than ever to their partnership”. This was a relief for the front row, who are more often than not clad in Philo’s clothes. Next season, Gvasalia’s Balenciaga designs will no doubt be spotted there too.
What has happened at the Paris-based, English-led house of Chloé is a microcosm of what has happened to fashion. Until a year or so ago, Chloé turned out solid, commercial collections based on a classically French, ultra-feminine style of dressing: blouses and elegant trousers, tousled hair and expensive sunglasses. Chic and pretty with a catch-all air of non-specific nostalgia, Chloé was bohemian in the most vanilla sense.
But Chloé, along with the rest of women’s fashion, has toughened up. Paris fashion week is a post-girly world, and nowhere is the change as obvious as it is at Chloé, where designer Clare Waight Keller gave Paris fashion week its first out-of-the-box hit on Thursday morning.
In search of an autumnal sequel to a summer collection of half-zip tracksuit tops and rave-y rainbow coloured skirts which confirmed a cooler, less wide-eyed tone for the brand six months ago, Waight Keller was researching motocross clothing when she came across the memoir of Anne-France Dautheville, who in 1973 became the first woman to motorcycle solo around the world. 
Dautheville became the starting point for a collection of leather trousers and dungarees, campfire ponchos and kaftan-styled dresses. The Parisian motifs of Chloé remain but with a new attitude: the 1970s sheer blouses are no longer ethereal but come in earthy tones of indigo and jade; handbags are oversized and slung casually behind one hip. There is still a silk scarf tied at the throat but combined with the leather and the flat boots and worn by models who scowl rather than decoratively pout, they take on a new highwayman swagger.
“I was looking to take the Chloé woman somewhere else,” said Waight Keller backstage after the show. “Somewhere tougher, more daring, more gritty. I was looking at motocross images, and I found this amazing woman. She had such independence of mind, of spirit: she didn’t get visas or anything, she just took off on these incredible adventures.”
Images from Dautheville’s book, ‘Et j’ai suivi le vent’ (‘And I followed the wind’) which Waight Keller had displayed on her backstage mood board, show a glamorous, long-haired woman in belted jackets, leather trousers and scoop neck T-shirts. “She took amazing dresses with her on her travels,” the designer noted. “I want Chloé to tell a story, and what better way than through a woman who really lived that free-spirited life?”
Amazon is expanding into grocery shopping after agreeing a deal to sell Morrisons food. But that is not the only initiative the ambitious US company is investing in:
Amazon is in talks with the former chief of Marks & Spencer womenswear about joining the company and is looking to build an own-label clothing brand. Frances Russell, who left M&S last year, would be a big-name hire for Amazon as it looks to build its credibility in clothing.
Amazon Pay Monthly quietly launched in the UK at the turn of the year and the service has the potential to significantly increase sales. It offers shoppers the chance to pay for orders worth more than £250 in monthly instalments for up to four years. Interest is free for the first 12 months on purchases of more than £400 and for 24 months on purchases of more than £1,000. Otherwise, interest is charged at 16.9%.
Amazon has opened its first bricks and mortar bookshop in Seattle, the company’s home city, and is understood to be considering opening hundreds more. The shop stocks about 6,000 titles, with the selection based on reviews and sales data from Amazon.com.
The service may still be awaiting approval from regulators, but Amazon Prime Air claims that it will use drones to deliver orders to customers within 30 minutes. Amazon and Jeff Bezos, its founder, are investing billions of dollars in trying to speed up delivery times.
Households in a number of US cities, including Seattle and New York, can use Amazon Fresh, the company’s full grocery service. This allows shoppers to buy items from local bakeries and butchers, as well as well-known global brands. Amazon Fresh has yet to launch in the UK; however, the company sells food in Britain through its Prime Now one-hour delivery service and through Pantry, which allows households to regularly stock up on a range of foods, cleaning products and toiletries.
If you shop on the UK high street, there is a strong chance your wardrobe contains some of Vanessa Lawes’s work. Over the past two decades, she has built a successful career designing fabric and counts a number of household names among her clients.
Even at school, Lawes knew she wanted a career in the creative industries and applied to art college to study graphic design. She was surprised to be told at her interview that she was heading in the wrong direction. “They said I should be considering going into fabric design instead,” she says. She quite liked the idea but “I did wonder how they could see that from the drawings of shoes and tubes of toothpaste and things like that that you do at school”.
She did a BTec art course, which covered “a bit of everything”, and then another, more specialised, two-year art course – though she was still not concentrating on fabrics and print design. “At that point I wanted to be a fine artist,” she says. “We did a term of photography, a term of textiles, a term of weave, some packaging design and a lot of life drawing, which I really loved.” That course led her to study an HND in printed textiles and embroidery in Cleveland, and she became seriously interested in designing prints for furnishing and upholstery.
It was her first break, however, that set the tone for the rest of her career. She landed a work placement at a print studio in London that sold designs to the fashion industry, and began working on fashion prints. Print studios employ teams of designers to work on designs for fabric, which are then marketed to a broad range of potential buyers by a dedicated sales person. They tend to pay a small wage and commission to the designer for work that is sold.
It was valuable experience, and Lawes was able to earn a bit of money making and selling cards and embroideries on the side, but it was proving difficult to find regular paid work. In 1995, she decided to look further afield. “I heard there were more jobs in New York in print studios for fashion, and I knew a friend of mine from college had managed to get a job there. So I saved up some money and went to New York with £1,000. I got sponsorship from a company there and within a month I had a job and an apartment. In the end I stayed for about six years.”
The process was meticulous then: “I would hand paint everything. You had to stretch your watercolour paper on a board and sketch out the design. If you made a mistake and your third flower went wrong, you would have to cut it out, put some paper behind it and repaint that.” But techniques began to be increasingly computer-based and, seeing the evolution, Lawes took an evening course in Photoshop while in the US. She now uses a computer for much of her work.
With a healthy portfolio, Lawes eventually came back to the UK and got a permanent job in a print studio, hand-painting designs to be sold for fabric. It was a style of working that she thrived on. “It’s lovely, creative work; you’re in a studio with music on, splashing paint around, creating print for fashion.”
When she and her partner started a family she wanted a more flexible working life, and at the same time saw an opportunity for learning about another side of her industry. “I was interested to see how my prints got turned into a product. I put my name about as a freelance print designer and began to work as one in-house.” She went on to work as a freelance designer for well-known companies such as Miss Selfridge, Next and Marks & Spencer.
Working for different clients over the years has given Lawes broad experience in different aspects of the industry. It has also taught her that meeting the needs of a buyer – whether that’s the brand selling the clothes or the one shopping on the high street – is very much part of the job. That means being versatile; her style, she says, is floral and feminine but she can adapt it to produce clean, geometric patterns if that’s what’s required. She is as comfortable picking up a paintbrush or drawing designs as she is filling in specification sheets to be sent to a factory.
As well as a flexible approach, print designers need to be resilient. “You have to learn to take criticism, which can obviously hurt when it’s something you have created,” says Lawes. “You also have to be willing to not always make a great deal of money – to do it for the love of the job first.”
While not all print designers have formal training, Lawes believes learning the trade is important. “To get a true understanding, you have to go on a printed textile course and study it,” she says. Beyond that, experience is crucial. “Just get as much experience as you can. Try to get placements or projects for people, and set yourself projects. Create moodboards and create prints around that.”
Lawes’s main job at the moment is as a print designer for the M&S Autograph range, where she works closely with the garment designers and buyers creating designs that fit with the brand’s overall vision. “They might say: ‘We need five prints, two of which will be for dresses and one for a blouse.’ Then we will work together, create storyboards and look at trends.”
She also works on her own designs, which are sold by an agent. “I don’t have to design them because they are trendy, or from the catwalk, or because they have the right number of colours,” she says. “These are prints that I can create just because they are beautiful.”
Australian surfwear brands have been urged to publish a list of every factory they use after an investigation revealed some garments being made for the Rip Curl brand had been manufactured in North Korea.
Rip Curl was forced to issue a public apology on Sunday, after a report by Fairfax Media showed images of the brand’s ski jackets taken by an Australian businessman on a tour of Taedonggang clothing factory near Pyongyang last year. The clothing was labelled “made in China.”
In a statement posted on Facebook on Sunday, the Victoria-based company said “the founders and directors of Rip Curl take full responsibility for this screw up”.
“We are very sorry that Rip Curl has breached the trust our customers put in us to make sure that the products they wear cause them no moral concern,” the statement said.
“That’s our responsibility to you and we have let you down on this one.
The company said it was made aware some months ago that some of its garments had been found in North Korean factories, and “took immediate steps to investigate and rectify the situation”.
“All of our suppliers know that our terms of trade prevent them diverting production to non-certified factories and we do undertake factory inspections and audits to try to prevent this happening,” the statement said.
“In this case we took immediate action to discipline the supplier for his breach and we are increasing our inspections and audits.
“Regardless of this, two styles totalling 4,000 units of Rip Curl ski wear did slip through and was shipped to customers.
“Again, this sort of screw up is our responsibility to prevent and we are doing everything in our power to make sure it does not happen again. We don’t like the abuse of people in their jobs in any country either and apologise wholeheartedly for letting this happen in the first place.”
Rip Curl’s chief financial officer, Tony Roberts, told Fairfax Media a supplier had diverted “part of their production order to an unauthorised subcontractor, with the production done from an unauthorised factory, in an unauthorised country, without our knowledge or consent, in clear breach of our supplier terms and policies”.
“We do not approve or authorise any production of Rip Curl products out of North Korea,” he said.
Michelle O’Neil, national secretary of the Textile, Clothing and Footwear Union of Australia (TCFUA), said it was “highly likely” that other Australian brands were sourcing part of their products from North Korea, saying incorrect labelling was a “longstanding practice”.
“The way it’s described in the industry is it’s China plus one, companies that have some of the work made in China and some of it made in North Korea,” O’Neil said.
“To suggest that it was unauthorised or they were unaware that it was happening in their supply chain in 2016 is unacceptable.”
O’Neil said it had become a “brand risk” for companies not to investigate their own supply chain, after the international outrage caused by the collapse of the Rana Plaza garment factory in Bangladesh in 2013, which killed 1,134 people.
“I don’t think any consumer will accept a company saying to them we didn’t know,” she said.
“Brands like Rip Curl want people to focus on the myth of the lifestyle they are selling. What they can’t hide anymore is the lifestyle of the workers making their products.”
Oxfam Australia’s labour rights advocacy manager, Joy Kyriacou, said it was not good enough for Rip Curl to plead ignorance or put the blame on its own supplier. “At the end of the day not only is it morally reprehensible, it’s actually their responsibility,” she said.
Kyriacou said it was the first time she had seen products sold under an Australian label outsourced to North Korea, which is not a signatory to any international labour agreements and does not allow for international oversight.
“I think Australians would be quite shocked to know that this iconic brand doesn’t know what’s happening in its supply chain and is potentially treating workers in a way that would not be acceptable to any Australian,” she said.
Oxfam has called on Rip Curl to publish details of its procurement policies and the factories used in its supply chain online, and urged fellow Australian surfwear brands Quiksilver and Billabong to follow suit.
Both Quiksilver and Billabong provide details of their supply chain policies online but neither provide details of the factories they use.
A spokesman from Billabong told Guardian Australia the company complies with a standard set by Social Accountability International and appointed a third-party compliance auditor last year after reviewing its practices in July.
He said the company had also narrowed its vendor base, conducted more than 60 compliance audits and engaged with NGOs, and said it would be willing to talk to Oxfam about their suggestions.
California-based Quiksilver is regulated by the California Transparency in Supply Chains Act 2010 and enforces its own Quiksilver Ethical Standards of Trade program, which requires suppliers to comply with a code of conduct and “act reasonably in all respects and to do their best to eliminate and prevent any abusive, exploitative or illegal conditions at their workplaces”.
Not long ago Imran Amed would sneak, blag or beg his way into fashion shows and stand furtively at the back. After years as a management consultant, he was transfixed by this strange industry – the clothes, the characters, money swishing around and impoverished young designers – and he would blog about it. These days, he’s often to be found on the front row, seated next to the really important people. He has turned a blog which started on his sofa in 2007, Business of Fashion, , into one of the industry’s most influential sites.
These are interesting times to be a nimble, fast-moving fashion site with a focus on business. “We really feel like this is the year there will be a massive shift in the way things work and a ripple effect on the media,” he says. He is referring to Burberry’s recent announcement, followed by other designers including Tom Ford, that its clothes will be available the moment its catwalk show ends. This direct-to-consumer approach could not only reduce the influence of the traditional middleman – glossy magazines, with positively sluggish lead times – but affect them in other ways. “If lots of companies start doing this what is the impact on print advertising? It’s going to be very interesting.”
We meet on the day the sixth edition of the BoF print magazine comes out. It costs £6 for 35 pages, interesting pages full of pieces you don’t get in the glossies, but you may wonder who buys it.
Why would a digital company – a site with 850,000 monthly visitors, with an events arm and a growing fashion careers and recruitment portal – put out a physical magazine? It was mainly a marketing thing, says Amed, to launch the BoF500, a list of the 500 most powerful people in fashion. “Putting it in print added value to it.” A modern media company, he says, needs to exist in multiple spaces. So BoF has run events, including ambitious plans for a huge one – a kind of TED for the fashion industry – towards the end of the year, and “they need to exist in print, in digital, in social, in video”.
Amed does everything from editing and writing to moderating comments and meeting industry contacts. “My main job is to get involved early deciding what pieces we’re going to concentrate on. We’re not a big company, not a big team, so I want to make sure we’re allocating [our resources] on things that are really fundamental and important to what people are thinking about.”
He wasn’t particularly interested in fashion growing up Calgary, Canada, except for religiously watching a fashion TV show hosted by the fashion writer Tim Blanks (now at BoF). Amed got an MBA from Harvard Business School, and came to London where he worked for consulting firm McKinsey. “My interest in fashion was very much from a consumer’s standpoint,” he says. After a few years, approaching his late 20s and feeling burnt out, he realised corporate consultancy wasn’t for him. He decided he loved the analytical side of his job, but wanted to apply it to something more creative. In 2005 a friend working for the British Fashion Council took him to fashion shows. “I started meeting these young designers. They would typically show up with piles of press and they had no idea how to take that attention and turn it into a business.”
Amed set up a company providing capital and expertise to designers but it folded within a year. Around the same time, he met star fashion bloggers including Scott Schuman, Diane Pernet and Susie Lau. “I didn’t really know what a blogger was,” he says with a laugh. “But I noticed they were all interpreting fashion through their own personal lens.” His personal lens, he realised, was business analysis.
He began to blog in January 2007 and continued to work as a fashion consultant. By 2013, BoF had, he says, “taken over my life. It was a project of passion but it wasn’t sustainable to continue in that form – I was doing it from my apartment and it became too much. I guess when the market started approaching me and said ‘what are you going to do with this thing? Can we buy it?’ I started wondering if maybe there is something of value here.”
He decided to focus on the site full time, raised more than £1.25m from well-connected people in the industry including Carmen Busquets (one of the original Net-a-Porter funders) and luxury giant LVMH. Was he nervous about having investors with a vested interest? “They were necessary because I would never have been able to hire the quality of people I needed without being able to pay them.” Whether they would compromise the site’s independence “was something I thought about very carefully. Managing that is as much about making it clear with people up front about how you work. We inserted clauses guaranteeing our editorial independence.”
For all the industry’s breathless excitement about BoF, there are similar and bigger offerings. Woman’s Wear Daily is the closest example, but BoF is catching up – its 850,000 monthly visitors are not far off WWD’s 1.1m; it has 1.5m Twitter followers to the US site’s 2.4m. If it lags behind WWD’s ability to regularly break news, it makes up for it in analysis. Amed’s 10,000-word piece on the fall-out from Net-a-Porter’s merger with YOOX last month, delivered in four parts to suit its smartphone-using audience, was a gripping read and may quieten the dissenters who say BoF is little more than an aggregator. More than half of its content is original, says Amed (the rest is financial reporting syndicated from places such as Bloomberg and Reuters, and a “daily digest” of articles from around the web).
Revenue comes from sponsorship and advertising, and from the BoF careers site – fashion companies including Victoria Beckham and Paul Smith pay a subscription to post vacancies. Is BoF profitable? “Not yet,” says Amed. “We’re still growing. Our new focus is on building education courses. I don’t have a timeline or a ticking clock, my investors don’t either – we’re all thinking about this as a long-term proposition, building something that’s going to last.”
Would he introduce a paywall? “Potentially. I think if you create good content then people should be willing to pay for it. People are down on media companies now and I understand why. I think it’s because there are these archaic models which don’t necessarily work any more. But … we live in an era where content drives the conversation.”
There will be more long reads, an idea that came from Vanity Fair’s editor Graydon Carter. “He said to me that every few months or so, you should do a piece that the whole fashion industry wants to read.” And for all his name-dropping, and the impressive way he has networked, Amed still retains an outsider’s eye for a trillion-dollar business many people still don’t take seriously. “Fashion is always seen as somewhat frivolous and self-indulgent,” he says. “And I think people on the inside maybe don’t see or understand how exciting and diverse a business it is. So I think perhaps it took someone like me to be an observer.”
Career 2002 management consultant, McKinsey and Company 2007 launches the Business of Fashion website 2011 launches bag design collaboration with Bill Amberg
New York fashion week has a new catchphrase: “Ready to wear – ready to go.” The see-now-buy-now mantra that is revolutionising the industry started in London, with Burberry’s unilateral abolition of the traditional six-month wait between a catwalk show and clothes arriving in store. But it was inevitable that New York, a city where instant gratification and 24-hour delivery are a way of life, would step up and own it.
The designer Michael Kors has a talent for pithy enunciations of where fashion is at. (“Ultimately, rich and pretty is what women want,” he pronounced at the height of last decade’s pre-financial crash mania for status dresses and It bags.)
This season, he’s into instaglam. Seven key garments from the collection shown at New York fashion week on Wednesday, as well as two bag styles and two shoe styles, will be available to buy instantly. “Our customer doesn’t think in terms of seasons, anyway,” said Kors at a press conference before his catwalk show. “She just thinks about what works for her life.”
But Kors will as yet stop short of a full see-now-buy-now upending of the calendar, with the rest of these catwalk pieces still not arriving in store for five months. The designer said he wanted the immediately available pieces to be “like a trailer for a film. It can’t give away the whole plot, or you don’t go see the film.”
The Hollywood spin is classic Kors, but the reality is more prosaic. However keen Kors is to fulfil customer demand for immediate gratification, he cannot fully commit to the new business model until questions about how the system works for department store buyers and glossy magazines, whose schedules rely on a time delay between catwalk and retail, have been ironed out.
This catwalk show, staged in a glossy white studio high above Tribeca, hinted at an interesting possible side-effect of fashion’s changing timeframe. Designing clothes that would be hanging on rails in his boutique on the afternoon of the same day they were shown on the catwalk seemed to shift something in Kors’s mindset, so that the clothes, while never lacking the swish and polish that his customer loves, were noticeably more wearable. Shoes were walkable, with lower heels and wider toes than usual. Almost everything had sleeves.
Michael Kors dresses America’s wealthiest women in arctic fox and ostrich feathers, while steering a global fashion empire whose ubiquitous handbags for around the £250 mark have made him a billionaire. His formula is to take the on-trend look of the moment and give it a private-jet upgrade.
This season, that means trousers cropped to just above the ankle bone, worn with chunky-heeled loafers. The pussybow blouse, star piece of myriad recent nerd-chic catwalk collections, appeared here as an elegant silk shirt dress, which could have been taken from Jackie Kennedy’s wardrobe. The pleated skirt, a staple item of 2016, is scissored into vertical ribbons from hem to upper thigh, a style usually called a “carwash” skirt – but rebranded here, with classic Kors panache, as the more elegant “streamer skirt.”
A barometer of the fashion industry right now shows the outlook as unsettled at best and volatile and stormy at worst, but with a long-term forecast for brighter times. An area of high atmospheric pressure from consumers has swept in just as cataclysmic changes are taking hold in the digital space, and the combination means the world of high fashion is at a tipping point.
Kanye West opened New York fashion week with a Madison Square Garden spectacle, launching his Yeezy Season 3 collection and releasing his latest album, to an audience of 18,000 editors, buyers, celebrity pals and paying members of the public.
The result? An uncomfortable juxtaposition of the doyennes of high fashion, Anna Wintour and Carine Roitfeld, and the reigning royals of reality TV – West’s wife Kim Kardashian and her extended family – modelling a capsule collection styled by Balmain’s Olivier Rousteing. The extravaganza was reportedly watched by an audience of 20 million people, via live stream.
And Diane von Furstenberg will ditch the traditional runway presentation in favour of a more personal “drop-in” experience at her Manhattan HQ. Guests will watch intimate vignettes acted out by social media modelling titans including Gigi Hadid and Karlie Kloss, while chatting with the designer over a cocktail.
So is this the end of the fashion show as we know it? It certainly seems changes are afoot. “Everyone drank the Kool-Aid for too long, but it’s just not working any more,” said von Furstenberg, who is also chair of the Council of Fashion Designers of America. “We are in a moment of complete confusion between what was and what will be. Everyone has to learn new rules.”
Navigating the fashionable way forward is complex. London fashion week begins on Thursday, with new initiatives aimed at engaging with the public. Footage of the shows will be screened at 60 outdoor locations around the UK, reaching an estimated audience of 35 million.
The future of the fashion show is being redefined on the hoof, with more brands shifting their focus from private trade-only presentations to consumer-driven entertainment marketing events, inspired by the success of the annual Victoria’s Secret runway extravaganza and the successful formula of the in-store trunk show (where a designer puts on a special display of their work for a select group).
Earlier this month Christopher Bailey, the influential chief creative and chief executive officer of Burberry, announced plans to replace the brand’s four annual shows with two, from September. Blending mens- and womenswear, the British business will make the collections “seasonless” and available to purchase immediately.
“The changes we are making will allow us to build a closer connection between the experience we create with our runway shows and the moment when people can explore the collections for themselves,” said Bailey. “From live streams, to ordering straight from the runway, to live social media campaigns, this is the latest step in a creative process that will continue to evolve.”
Scott Tepper, fashion buying and merchandising director at Liberty, said last week that Bailey had “probably singlehandedly” saved the fashion industry from itself. Alexandra Shulman, editor of British Vogue, agreed, saying: “Logistically looking at the fashion show construct, it makes very little sense now. If you put a business consultant in to look at what the fashion industry is doing, they would think it was insane.”
Barclays’ European retail equity team was quick to applaud Bailey’s move: “This seems a very commercial and sensible move in today’s society, where images and demand are created so widely on social media, but delivery is so far in the distance.”
Fashion insiders have long been forecasting a seismic shift in the way clothes are marketed and sold, and Burberry’s announcement has opened the doors to others.
After the Burberry’s announcement, Tommy Hilfiger said it would from September be synchronising its vamped-up runway presentations with retail deliveries. Tom Ford, the American designer and film director, said he would also be changing the way he sells his eponymous collections.
“We have been living with a fashion calendar and system that is from another era,” says Ford, who, as creative director of Gucci between 1994 and 2004, was credited with taking the Italian house from virtual bankruptcy to a turnover of $4.3bn. “We spend an enormous amount of money and energy to stage an event that creates excitement too far in advance of when the collection is available to the consumer.”
With many high-street retailers offering fast-selling, fortnightly “drops” of new styles, teased with carefully targeted social media and digital mail shots, the idea of a designer behemoth that fails to make its product available at the moment of maximum hype seems an anachronism.
Many luxury brands know about the power of social media – Chanel has 9.6 million Instagram followers, and Burberry recently gatecrashed Brooklyn Beckham’s 5.9 million followers by controversially commissioning the 16-year-old to photograph its latest campaign – but have no understanding of the pace of modern consumer culture.
Ken Downing, fashion director of the upmarket US department store Neiman Marcus, recently reported showing a client an $11,000 embellished jacket that had arrived in store the previous day, only for her to respond “but don’t you have anything new?”. The style had been visible online since October, and the customer already had fashion fatigue.
“The history of fashion shows was to show the buyers and the press the message of the season. But technology has utterly changed everything in our industry,” says Downing. “That customer continues to follow Instagram and Twitter and watches the live streamed fashion shows. What they are seeing, they want.”
A few designers have been experimenting with the see-now-buy-now model, including New York designers Thakoon and Rebecca Minkoff, Italian label Moschino and British brands Alice Temperley and Matthew Williamson, but the designer industry has largely been slow to keep up with changes in consumer behaviour. Henry Holland, the designer behind Britain’s House of Holland, says there is a tangible spike in online sales when an edit of his collection is made instantly available, but the lesson has not been absorbed by his contemporaries.
“The fashion world has had its fingers in its ears for some time now,” says fashion writer and consultant Melanie Rickey, who sees the future of the fashion show as an entertaining spectator sport and the ultimate selling tool. “I’m jaded by the time things appear in the shops, because they’ve been on the red carpet and on every blog. And I’m not alone. Making styles available immediately after revealing them on the catwalk will completely revitalise the industry.”
But others are sceptical about consumer-focused catwalks. Brands take the temperature of a collection when they show it to the seasoned eyes of the fashion press and store buyers, and use this to guide order numbers for production. “As things stand, we need the lead time to make the garments in time for market,” said a spokesperson for Belgian designer Dries van Noten.
Fashion historian Judith Watt also remains to be convinced: “Anything that stops the utter insanity of the current system, in terms of extravagant shows and rapacious buying, is a good thing. But I’m not confident this will make anything better. It won’t reduce demand and will just be more of the same. We need a radical shift. The industry is on its knees: designers are having breakdowns because of the pressure to deliver new, new, new. The creativity has gone and we’re resorting to churn. It is an industry broken by greed and insatiable consumption.”
Fashion veteran Paul Smith is restructuring his business after four decades, describing an industry that has “gone mad” with a “horrendous disease of greed and overexpansion and unnecessary massive oversupply”.
Christened the IWWIWWIWI (I want what I want when I want it) generation, young people have become accustomed to incessant purchase and instant gratification, heightened by a new generation of click-and-buy apps and shoppable magazines. But Iain R Webb, professor of design at Kingston University, calls this the fashion equivalent of a Pot Noodle: “It gives an unhealthy, quick fix without being truly satiating. You’re always going to be left wanting more.”
London-based designer Christopher Raeburn agrees: “The industry is moving faster and the immediacy cannot be sustainable long term. It’s important to involve, understand and include your customers, but in a way that doesn’t destroy the industry’s creativity.”
Matteo Renzi has been mocked for his personal fashion foibles in the past, but the Italian prime minister will nevertheless brave the tough crowd of Milan fashion week later this month, becoming the first premier to open the event.
While Renzi is not expected to take a spin down the runway, the move is seen as an important show of support for the beleaguered industry, which has been hit by a slowdown in the Middle East and Russia and a drop-off in the Chinese market.
Renzi’s decision also reflects the image he consistently seeks to portray of himself: that he is a dynamic leader and the face of a modernising Italy. Indeed, he has often used fashion to try to make a statement – from the leather jacket he donned for Chi magazine while he was mayor of Florence (some said he was channelling the Fonz) to the “jeans and no-tie” look that became a symbol of his desire to shake-up the political establishment.
Last year Renzi was criticised by the Corriere della Sera newspaper for wearing trousers that were far too short, exposing nearly two inches of his blue socks, at a meeting with the president of the Philippines. In 2014 he was given some fashion advice by fellow Italian Giorgio Armani, who reportedly said Renzi – whom he described as “adorable” – ought to wear ties and control his hand gestures, given his status.
Italy’s economic development minister Carlo Calenda criticised Italian politicians last year for their snobbish attitude toward the fashion industry, which he said was often ignored by the political class despite its cultural importance.
Carlo Alberto Carnevale Maffè, a business professor at the Bocconi school of management in Milan, said on Wednesday: “Matteo Renzi needs a bit of refurbishment as far as his personal style. But his personal presence at the event helps a lot in terms of bringing visibility to a national industry. The fault is on those who never did it before.”
He added: “He is also borrowing something aesthetically. Being associated with fashion gives a sense of youth, modernity, of a certain sensibility, which other prime ministers – think of [Romano] Prodi or Mario Monti with his coat from the 70s – [did not have]. They were the anti-fashion figures. It wouldn’t fit their personality.”
Milan fashion week begins on 24 February. Renzi’s office declined to reveal what he would wear to the event.
Bathed in fluorescent lights, the basement room in an Istanbul suburb is completely white. Between mountains of white fabric, Shukri carries clothing to and from the sewing stations and packs white jumpers in boxes. He is clenching a pair of scissors between his teeth looking every bit the seasoned worker, although he is only 12 years old.
On this weekday morning most Turkish children are in school, but this Syrian boy is busy supplying the 15 sewing machines producing clothing mainly destined for the European market. Shukri, a Syrian Kurd who fled with his uncle from Qamishli in northern Syria 10 months ago, often works 60 hours a week earning 600 Turkish lira (£138) to help support his family. “I can’t go to school here because of work,” he says, “but I will go back to school when we return to Syria.”
The factory’s supervisor agrees that 12 years old is very young to be working so many hours, but shrugs off responsibility. “It’s not our fault that they need to work,” he says, “the state failed to provide for them.”
There are no figures on the informal Syrian labour force in Turkey but there are almost 2.3 million registered Syrian refugees living in the country, according to the UN, with about 9% of them in refugee camps. The rest have to provide for themselves with no financial support from the state. An expert from the Centre for Middle Eastern Strategic Studies has suggested around 250,000 Syrian refugees are working illegally in the country, with a recent Human Rights Watch report claiming child labour is “rampant”. Many reports of illegal working come from the garment sector, the country’s second largest industry.
Turkey’s giant textile industry is a major supplier to Europe but remains largely unregulated, an estimated 60% of the total workforce is unregistered, meaning they work informally, usually without a contract or any employment benefits. Syrian refugees make up a particularly vulnerable section of the workforce. Visiting Syrian workers in textile workshops in three Turkish cities – Istanbul, Mersin and Adana – I encountered child labour, poor working conditions and low pay. 
Turkey’s policy until this month had been to treat Syrians as temporary guests, with no right to work, meaning refugees could only work illegally. The landscape is shifting, however. As part of a deal with the EU, the Turkish government last week announced new regulations that will allow any Syrian who has been in the country for six months to apply for a work permit.
The move has been tentatively welcome by NGOs. Danielle McMullan, senior researcher at the UK-based non-profit Business & Human Rights Resource Centre, said permits “will go some way to provide legal protections for working Syrian refugees”. But she warned: “Businesses shouldn’t become complacent, they will need to know where Syrian refugees are in their supply chain and be diligent to the exploitation that has and will continue to take place.”
A key aim of the new work permits is to ensure Syrian refugees in Turkey receive the minimum wage, currently set at 1,647 lira a month (£379). Their illegal status and lack of any bargaining power mean that, for many, wages are far below this level.
In another Istanbul basement workshop, 28-year-old Abdo who fled the war-torn city Deir ez-Zor after clashes between Islamic State and the Syrian regime, speaks about this discrimination. “We get treated differently here,” he says, “we get paid less and have to work harder than our Turkish colleagues.”
“Because you cannot work legally, there is no job security ... Our pay is always late; right now our pay is six days overdue and I have bills to pay.”
In the south of Turkey, wages for refugees are often even lower. In the coastal city of Mersin, I meet 20-year-old Leila in an “under the stairs” garment workshop. She fled here with her parents from Aleppo three years ago. “My parents are too old to work, so I have to provide for us,” she says, “but my earnings are not enough for us to survive.”
Leila earns 1.6 Turkish lira (37p) per hour. “I make 350 lira per month, but we pay 450 lira in rent,” she says. “My brother sends money from Sweden in order for us to survive.” Leila would love to go back to school: “I dream of becoming a teacher.”
The informality of the Turkish textile industry means little is known about how much illegal refugee labour is in the supply chain of European brands. The sector is dominated by medium-sized factories and smaller workshops, often with poor working conditions and no auditing, to which larger factories outsource production.
Many European brands import from Turkey as it is close and known for the quality of the work. Turkey is the third largest supplier of clothing to Europe, after China and Bangladesh. In 2014, Europe imported €13.7bn (£10.4bn) worth of textiles and clothing from Turkey. 
In Istanbul, the white jumpers that Shukri is packing in boxes will be sent to Italy. Shukri shows me the brand stitched in the neck: Piazza Italia. “The business that owns this workshop both sells to the Turkish market and exports to Germany and Italy,” the supervisor says. Italian clothing company Piazza Italia did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment.
In another Istanbul workshop where Syrian refugees are working for 950 lira (£223) per month for a minimum of 60 hours a week, the clothes are made for German brands Orsay and Margittes.
While Margittes did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment on the working conditions found at its sub-contractor, Marie-Claude Koenig, business development and CSR officer at Orsay told the Guardian the company very much recognises its “responsibility to improve value-chain management and overall working conditions”. She said Orsay had previously found “critical issues” at a factory in its supply chain which led to a suspension of production.
Recognising the high degree of sub-contracting in the Turkish supply chain, Koenig said the way to increase the rights of workers was through alliances such as the Ethical Trade Initiative of which Orsay is a member. “The challenges in the Turkish textile industry can’t be addressed by an individual company,” she said.
Fair Wear Foundation, an NGO with 90 members representing more than 120 garment brands, has focused on the Turkish garment industry. It advises its members to identify all production locations and ensure they are included in their supply-chain monitoring system. “Under no circumstances should the vulnerability of refugees be used to deny them their basic rights, such as no child labour, no discrimination and the payment of a living wage,” said Ruth Vermeulen, senior international verification coordinator at the Fair Wear Foundation.
Where refugee labour is found, Vermeulen advises brands not to terminate links with suppliers, instead “they should work together with the supplier towards formalising the workers’ status, however possible”. This can be assisting them to apply for identification, residency permits, or applying for a work permit through the employer. However, she admits that these steps are not easy in the current climate.
Other organisations are pushing brands to be transparent about the refugees in their supply chains. The Business & Human Rights Resource Centre has asked 28 major clothing brands to account for their supply chains and outline the steps they are taking to protect Syrian refugees from abuse and exploitation. It will publish responses in February.
With the eyes of the EU fixed on Turkey’s capability to contain refugees, a European push for human rights and labour conditions in the country may be further away than it has been for some time. As European imports of garments from Turkey continue to increase, clothing companies could be the drivers of change. “Allowing Syrians to work legally should give brands the opportunity to be more open and collaborative on this serious issue,” said McMullan.
Jimmy Choo reported rising sales in 2015 as Asian shoppers snapped up its luxury shoes.
The company said it had seen strong growth in Asia, especially Japan. Other luxury goods retailers such as Burberry have been hit by a slowdown in China.
In Europe, Jimmy Choo benefited from rising tourist numbers, but highlighted the loss of Russian visitors at its European stores amid the country’s economic malaise, and the impact of the Paris terror attacks. Its US business made “good progress” despite volatile exchange rates and competition.
Shoes accounted for more than three-quarters of revenues, with men’s footwear again Jimmy Choo’s fastest growing category even though women’s shoes remain its bread and butter.
Accessories sales were stable, with a trend towards smaller bags. The firm recently launched its Illicit fragrance for women and continues to roll out men’s fragrances. It also highlighted successes in sunglasses and eyewear.
The company, founded in 1996 by shoe designer Jimmy Choo and Vogue accessories editor Tamara Mellon, said retail net revenues grew by 9% at constant exchange rates to £208m last year, contributing to 7% growth in overall revenues to £318m.
Peter Harf, the chairman, said: “The company successfully reversed the first-half decline in wholesale revenues and is on track with growth forecasts in Asia and Japan where brand awareness continues to grow strongly.”
Jimmy Choo has been refitting some of its 140 stores around the world and said this had paid off.
Shares in the London-listed company were up 1.7% to 129.5p just before midday on Thursday.
Monday’s news that French Connection is to revive the eyebrow-raising FCUK logo of the 90s has been hailed as part of a wider fashion flashback to the decade of slip dresses and zip up tracksuit tops. But forget any talk of revivals for a moment and focus on what’s right in front of us: the f-word used as a marketing ploy, albeit with blushes saved by a strategic typo.
Slogan T-shirts are an obvious way to make a statement with your wardrobe – and those that swear are a particularly route-one form of fashion hieroglyphics. They offer the NSFW controversy loved by teenagers of every generation, guaranteed to get a satisfying eye-roll from parents. They signal that you’re definitely a rebel, but – in the case of FCUK – one with a 12A rating, thanks to the absence of actual swear words.
The 90s also gave us Fuct, a skate brand that even has a T-shirt emblazoned with a pile of cocaine and the slogan “cocaine cool” to really up the outrage.
The most recent incarnation of “fuck” in fashion comes from Commes Des Fuckdown, the streetwear interpretation of Comme Des Garçons. Seen on hats and hoodies, it’s worn by those keen to express their rebel hearts – AKA Madonna and Justin Bieber. The difference here is there’s no beating around the bush: there’s a “fuck” right there, plain for all to see (and disapprove of). The media happily obliged when Madonna wore one of the sweary beanies while performing in 2014.
But in 2016, slapping a jumbled-up version of the f-word on a top feels a little bit quaint. Of course, fashion has long experimented with slogans and imagery designed to shock. This has been writ large through sexual imagery on T-shirts – of which Vivienne Westwood’s Cowboys T-shirt, designed in 1975, is possibly the most infamous. Just two guys in profile, standing a whisker away from each other, dressed as cowboys and naked from the waist down. That image is still a jaw-dropper now. It makes the FCUK T-shirts look like child’s play.
A camel, a biplane and a monster truck convene in the Californian desert. A trio of dalmatians flank Naomi Campbell in a white convertible. Nine models lounge in haute couture in an enchanted forest. A handsome spaceman washes up in his capsule on a hazy beach.
Often described as the most influential fashion editor of the past 30 years, US Vogue creative director Grace Coddington has produced some of fashion’s most memorable imagery. Her pictures might be jolly and decadent or moody and mysterious, but they always tell a story – and a sweeping, vivid yarn at that.
On Wednesday, Coddington announced that she was stepping down from her role. It sounded, at first, like a subtle shift – the 74-year-old would become creative director-at-large, working on several shoots a year – but the industry’s reaction was seismic. New York Times fashion critic Vanessa Friedman described her decision as “the tectonic plates shifting”, arguing that the old guard of fashion might finally be making way for a new, more digitally aware culture.
As Friedman also pointed out, Coddington’s move was particularly poignant given her status as the living embodiment of the good old days of fashion. Highly recognisable – a shock of orange hair against porcelain skin, the kind of visual branding Elizabeth I would have appreciated – she sketches pictures from the front row while those around her take snaps on their iPhones. She has been central to the industry since the 1960s, first as a model, then as an editor on British and later US Vogue. But what really sets her apart is her determination to create beautiful imagery against all odds, even if it involves batting off commercial concerns or risking the wrath of governments – as in 1976, when she had Jerry Hall pose in a red swimsuit atop a Soviet monument in the USSR, and had to smuggle out the film. In 2009, she became the unlikely star of the Vogue documentary The September Issue, in which she came across as the guardian of artistry in the face of Anna Wintour’s pragmatic commercialism.
Historically, sweeping Coddington-style editorials have always been about more than clothes, according to Susanna Brown, photography curator at the Victoria and Albert Museum. Since the first fashion magazine photography, in the 1880s, they have sold a lifestyle and helped shape contemporary culture. During the second world war, says Brown, “the British and American editions of Vogue raised morale with optimistic articles and photographs of practical wartime fashions. Cecil Beaton used the bomb-damaged Inner Temple as the backdrop for an image of a suited model in a defiant pose.”
But constructing dreams the Coddington way comes at a price. Hours of manpower are poured into the organisation of such photo shoots; thousands must be spent on flights and accommodation. Even Coddington is not immune to such concerns, says Iain R Webb, former Blitz, Harpers & Queen and Elle fashion editor. “Things were already changing during my time at Elle in the late 1990s,” he says. “Airlines stopped handing out free travel for credits and hotels became less accommodating. Carting a team off to exotic locations was no longer cost effective. Combined with the demand on output – less time, more images – and a growing pressure to please advertisers, the process started to become less creative and more prescriptive. Grace summed it up when she told me, ‘You’d go on a Vogue trip to Africa for two weeks. Now it’s two days and it’s not even Africa - it’s Miami, and you’re trying to make it look like Africa!’”
The influence of these grand gestures is hard to quantify, but it is dwarfed by the reach of social media. As recently as the 1990s, such images were the only way many fashion fans would get to see the work of their favourite designers. Now, they’re one of many channels. One cameraphone snap by Cara Delevingne reaches 25.7 million Instagram users at the touch of a “share” button, while US Vogue’s circulation has remained more or less constant at around 1.2m since Wintour took over in 1988.
That said, it is certainly possible for a glossy magazine to reach millions through its photography. In 2014, Kim Kardashian’s Paper magazine cover shoot – in which the reality TV star balanced a champagne glass on her bottom – caused such a furore that it was widely described as “breaking the internet”. Hundreds of millions of people saw the pictures – Kardashian alone has more than 50 million Instagram followers – despite the fact that the magazine’s circulation is just 155,000.
US Vogue’s glossy, 20-page fashion editorials, on the other hand, do not really live on the internet. Though a few may be available online, their main home is within the physical pages of the magazine. They offer a mark of difference from the blurry images casually consumed for free on the internet; they help to make fashion magazines escapist paradises suitable for securing high-end advertising. They are designed to be pored over slowly by invested readers, perhaps while sipping red wine in the bath. Only time will tell if such an experience will one day appeal to iPhone-addicted millennials.
Among the old guard in the industry, glossy fashion photo shoots remain gravely important. Editors and buyers still discuss them reverentially at fashion shows; photographers and stylists use the cachet of shooting for Vogue to secure commercial jobs. They are a measure of power, creativity and cultural clout; a connection to the rarefied worlds of art and photography.
Whether or not Coddington’s move will have a tectonic effect remains to be seen, but it shines a light on the deepening divide between the industry’s priorities and readers’ increasingly digital lives. Publishers should use this moment to work out how to maintain their gravitas while producing content that feels – as Vogue might say of this season’s most fashionable shoe – suitably modern and relevant.
Lucinda Chambers
Fashion director at British Vogue and former assistant to Grace Coddington
Most stylists are interested in one specific look, but Grace has extraordinary range. She can do anything from grunge to couture, she understands the point of view of an incredible variety of photographers, and she does simplicity well, but can also go completely over the top. She does everything to an extraordinary level. She has an astounding imagination and a childlike view of fashion, as though she is seeing everything for the first time. She has also broken much new ground because of her longevity. She was the first person to put a model wearing no makeup on the cover of Vogue in the late 1970s – I was her assistant at the time and we received hundreds of letters, “shocked and outraged from Reading”. I don’t think she is afraid of anything – and the same can’t be said of many fashion editors and stylists today.
Susanna Brown
Curator of photographs for the V&A’s Word and Image department
During both her career as a model and her long tenure as Vogue’s creative director, Grace has been respected for her individualism and her understanding of fashion as an expressive medium. She has collaborated with several generations of photographers, modelling for the likes of Frank Horvat, Norman Parkinson and Jeanloup Sieff in the 1960s. Her past experience as a model brought insight to her work on the other side of the camera, for instance with Guy Bourdin, Barry Lategan and Helmut Newton at British Vogue between 1968 and 87. Since the late 80s at American Vogue she has championed the fantasy of fashion, and collaborated with photographers such as Annie Leibovitz, Steven Klein, Craig McDean, Steven Meisel, Mert & Marcus, David Sims, Bruce Weber – to name just a few. It seems that she has never been driven by an interest in consumerism or fleeting trends. In the transient world of fashion, she’s remained true to her unadulterated creative vision.
Robin Muir
Contributing editor and former picture editor at British Vogue, and curator of Vogue 100: A Century of Style at the National Portrait Gallery
When you talk to some younger creatives, you sense a slight embarrassment about doing fashion – as though it’s a bit cheap and commercial – but for 50 years, in front of and behind the camera, Grace has delighted in fashion photography for fashion photography’s sake. She has worked brilliantly with photographers – having been a model, she had longstanding relationships with the likes of Bourdin and Newton, who would not have dreamed of working for British Vogue had it not been for Grace. She also put Weber on the map. The 1982 shoot they collaborated on (see picture above) was a seminal moment. A tribute to the artist Edward Weston, using non-models, many of whom were shot from behind, it felt like such a departure from the bright colours of so much photography in the 1980s. You just wanted to run through that cornfield, wearing that coat.
Sex sells. You already knew that. But can it also work as a marketing tool? That’s the question that fashion is posing currently, one that can definitely prompt the thinking emoji.
JW Anderson, the darling of “interesting”, thinky fashion in London, known for pioneering the gender fluid trend, streamed his menswear show on gay dating app Grindr this month. Grindr also provided inspiration for LCM newcomer Pieter, who turned the fashion concept of cruise – the collections that appear part-way through a season – into gay cruising. Using a Robert Mapplethorpe image as inspiration for leather and zips, Grindr provided the slogans - “HH” read one T-shirt, code on the app for “high and horny”.
It might seem an in-the-know gesture but when those in-the-know reach seven million – the number of Grindr users – it’s hardly niche. Pornhub – the video-sharing site – has even better numbers: it had more than 21bn hits in 2015. Diesel, which has previous when it comes to playing with porn imagery in its marketing, has made banner ads for its underwear specifically for the site. Images of models in underwear surround potential porn videos for subscribers to click through. 
The last time fashion imagery flirted with the x-rated world was the early noughties. Then, photographers such as Terry Richardson took pictures for American Apparel that looked like a hipster version of readers’ wives – young women wearing high sports socks, oversized glasses and very little else. The soundtrack was songs like NERD’s Lapdance and Cisco’s Thong Song. Images such as David LaChapelle’s one of Gisele Bundchen with the baby oil, tan and legs-splayed pose of a porn star covered the Face magazine, while Gucci’s advert with a model revealing the brand’s G shaved in her pubic hair would have been on the pages inside. “That was voyeurism; trying to be seedy,” says Jonathan Openshaw, and editor at consumer trends agency the Future Laboratory, which is putting together a report on the intersection between the x-rated and fashion. “This is fun, playful. People are having fun on Grindr, after all.”
Arguably, sex returning to fashion goes against the run of play. Over the past five years, fashion has been about taste and restraint – self-control, rather the S&M kind. With designers like Phoebe Philo at Celine and indeed Anderson, the items of desire have been awkward, interesting and relatively sexless – tunic tops, wide-legged trousers, flats. Even the latest fashion hero, Gucci’s Alessandro Michele, is more about geek than glamazon. Recently, though, there has been a move to the explicit, especially in menswear. Rick Owens’ male models last year wore tunics with holes designed to expose their genitalia, and Vivienne Westwood’s this month wearing necklaces with pendants in the shape of penises.
Openshaw says this isn’t actually about aesthetics or titillation. Instead, it’s a cold hard way to reach consumers who spend more and more time online. “JW Anderson talked about new media rather than sex and porn,” he says. “He’s talking about where people are spending time. Brands need to be more aware of that – and do it in a way that’s not like the weird dad at a disco.” The idea that sites relating to sex and dating are just as valid as a way for fashion brands to reach people as, say, Instagram or Twitter might be one that takes a while to get used to. But it’s the one that the brands involved are pushing and one that a new generation will take in their stride. Nicola Formichetti, the Artistic Director of Diesel, says: “We are just bringing our advertising where the traffic is the highest on the web, and it’s there. We are simply following people and where they go online.” Anderson, meanwhile, described Grindr as “a widely used social platform that really reflects youth culture right now … and, of course, the global reach is undeniable.”
Lifetime has announced that season five of Project Runway All Stars will debut on 11 February, featuring, most notably, 2013 season 12 winner Dom Streater. As a fan of Dom and her designs, I’m pleased – but her inclusion, and the regular return of former winners to the All Stars lineup, raises some questions. Project Runway is supposed to be a launching pad for the “next great American fashion designer”, as one of the show’s taglines insists. So if season 12 did what it was supposed to and turned Dom into America’s next great American fashion designer, what is she doing on reality television?
Alas, the truth is that Project Runway has only really fulfilled its remit once: Christian Siriano, the winner of season four way back in 2007, has become a bona fide fashion superstar. His eponymous line launched in 2008 has made millions, and he dresses everyone from Sarah Jessica Parker to Victoria Beckham and Taylor Swift. He’s returned to Project Runway too – not as a contestant, but as the regular celebrity judge on the Junior spin-off show.
The existence of All Stars underlines the fact that most Project Runway contestants – and yes, most Project Runway winners – haven’t reached that level, despite the show’s prize money (typically $100,000) and professional opportunities. Fashion is an upscale endeavor, built on wealthier clients and critical cred; American Idol winners can convert television exposure into album sales at $10 a pop, but the move from celebrity to income is a lot trickier for designers.
Just because it’s trickier doesn’t mean there’s no way to do it though. Project Runway hasn’t launched many top, celebrated, legends-in-their-own-time designers. But it has given many designers a leg up, or helped them establish themselves in various niches throughout the industry. Chloe Dao, the winner of season two in 2005, was able to scale up her Houston boutique after her victory; a decade later, her store is still successful and she’s still designing. Austin Scarlett, a popular season one contestant (and a finalist on All Stars season one), was hired as creative director for Amsale’s luxury gown collection from 2006-2009, and has his own bridal collection now. Emilio Sosa, a season seven finalist in 2010 (who came back for All Stars season two), designs for theater and was nominated for a Tony for his costumes. Mila Hermanovski, also a finalist in season seven (and a season one All Star), had her own line for a while but has mainly worked as a designer for film; she made costumes for Tron: Legacy and Star Trek: Into Darkness. Daniel Vosovic (season two finalist) designs regularly for Emma Stone; Michael Costello (season eight, and a season one All Star finalist) designs for Beyoncé. Valerie Mayen of season eight, who is appearing on the new All Stars season, has a successful online business. None of them is at Siriano’s level, but they’re all working.
Admittedly, it’s not entirely clear that they’re working because of Project Runway. The show tends to downplay the extent to which many of its contestants are more or less established before they come on the show; Hermanovski and Sosa were both costume designers before they competed, for example, and Costello was designing for celebrity clients before his season. One of PR’s most successful high fashion alumni, womenswear and menswear designer Malan Breton, was unaccountably eliminated on the second challenge of season three – his Wikipedia page doesn’t even mention he was on the show. Project Runway was a blip in his career, not a launching pad.
Project Runway likes to present itself as a magical process for transforming unknowns into superstars. In fact, though, it’s something more interesting – a lens for seeing the broad range of options for working artists who aren’t nobodies but aren’t necessarily the most, most important somebodies either. Media representations tend to present the arts as an all-or-nothing proposition. Hollywood focuses on superstar successes – with biopics of James Brown, Jimi Hendrix, Basquiat – or on people winning their international niche, a la the Pitch Perfect films.
Looking at Project Runway alums, on the other hand, offers a different perspective – a vision of the arts as day job. Project Runway isn’t the one, shining, ticket to becoming Alexander McQueen for the designers who appear on it. Instead, it’s a career strategy for working artists that can generate contacts, visibility and (if you’re very lucky) some investment capital.
That’s presumably the calculus for Dom Streater. Her business seems to be doing quite nicely, if the number of sold-out pieces is any indication, but she has obviously decided another infusion of publicity and/or cash wouldn’t hurt. Project Runway didn’t exactly make her the next great American fashion designer, and Project Runway All Stars probably won’t either. But she, and lots of other talented, creative folks who appear on the show, have managed to find a way to make their careers work, as Project Runway mentor Tim Gunn might say. The best thing about Project Runway isn’t its seasonal coronations. It’s the way it shows, despite itself, that the arts aren’t a competition, and that you don’t need to be a superstar to make a living doing what you love.
“It’s all about the new Gucci, isn’t it?” Since I don’t have a clue what the old Gucci is, I decide to keep my mouth shut. Top male model David Gandy does not have the luxury of silence. As an ambassador – Our Man in Dolce & Gabbana – for the clunkily named London Collections Men, the bloke’s equivalent of London fashion week, he’s obliged to answer any question that comes along. A foreign TV crew stick a microphone in front of him and ask his considered opinion on the effects of weather on men’s fashion shopping patterns. David mumbles something along the lines that all weather patterns can be good for shopping and the TV crew leave happy.
Then the concrete basement darkens and Gandy takes his seat alongside some other eye candy bussed in for the benefit of the fashion writers strategically placed on the front row opposite them. I’m later told that Nick Jonas and Chloe Green were there, although I’m not sure which was which. Or who they are. But this is the Topman show, the LCM big-buck opener, so they must be important.
The music is ramped up to volume 11 as the models stride unblinkingly up and down the runway. The whole show is done and dusted in about 10 minutes and I find I can remember almost nothing about the clothes, except possibly that pyjamas are going to be big this autumn, as I’ve been mesmerised by all the high male cheek bones and impossibly slim hips on display. I’m ticked off for this. “You’re supposed to be looking at the clothes,” I’m told. The models are merely moving clothes hangers.
Gandy is also guest of honour at LCM’s launch party the previous evening, hosted by GQ editor Dylan Jones – the capo di tutti capi of London fashion ambassadors – at Spencer House in St James’s, the heart of London’s clubland for gents d’un certain age. Rooms that could be decked out for a Julian Fellowes costume drama seem an unlikely venue for a congregation of London’s top fashionistas, but no one cares. The celeb count is all that matters. “Isn’t that a bloke who had a small part in The Hobbit?” someone whispers loudly. I thought all the parts in The Hobbit were small.
At last, I spot someone I recognise: Tory MP Damian Collins. He looks almost as out of place as I feel. “Nice suit,” I say, trying to break the ice (even if it does look a little on the tight side).
“Thank you,” he replies politely. “It’s a Romney tweed made from the wool of sheep who came from my constituency.”
“I’m chair of the all party parliamentary committee for textile and fashion.” Not one of the most contested committee chairs in parliament.
“Which MPs have the best fashion sense?”
The silence is telling. Collins beetles off to find someone else to talk to. There is no sign of Ed Vaizey, the culture minister, whose name was on the guest list. I’m just about to leave when I see someone in a heavy patterned velvet suit who looks vaguely familiar. “That’s Judy Blame,” I’m informed. “The stylist. He designs accessories for Louis Vuitton and is one of the the key men in London fashion.”
“Now I remember,” I say. “The last time I saw him it was the late 70s, he was called Chris and I was crashed out in a dingy Kennington flat.” How time flies. I reintroduce myself to Judy. He has no idea who I am, but is very polite about it.
The next day sees me in a blacked-out people carrier, trying and failing to open a designer can of sparkling water – all black, of course – as I am whisked to the next show. The others in the car are talking about the relative merits of flocking; I am just thinking I am finally living the dream. No one who is anyone in fashion would travel in anything that had windows that the riff-raff could look into.
We arrive at Victoria House in Bloomsbury for another top-ticket show. Nasir Mazhar is one of Britain’s enfant terrible designers and, although Gandy isn’t in the audience, everyone else is. I’m thrilled to find there are free gifts laid out on the front row. I eagerly open mine, picking up dirty looks from everyone else. It’s not cool to open your freebies till you’re back home. Socks. Great socks in a hip black-and-white pattern. Comfortable, too. Not so sure about the show, though. Men wearing bee hives on their heads and open-crotched trousers with string thongs isn’t quite my thing. A word of advice, Nasir. Stick to the socks. You’ve nailed them.
I feel like I’m getting the hang of this. Close my eyes and I’m channelling 1993. As an idea, not a year. With the right kind of flocking. Obviously. If you need any more ambassadors, Dylan, you know where to find me.
Last week, Dolce & Gabbana released its first hijab and abaya collection for Muslim women in the Middle East. Catering to the Islamic requirements of loose-fitting clothing, the collection featured flowing, full-length dresses with long sleeves as well as headscarves – a striking image from a global fashion brand at a time where suspicion and hatred of Muslims is on the rise.
D&G is the latest of several major fashion labels to have recently created clothing for Muslims. DKNY, Tommy Hilfiger and Oscar de la Renta have also produced a clothing line targeting the Muslim market, while H&M featured a hijab-wearing model in one of its 2015 advert campaigns.
Across social media, I have watched Muslim women around the world falling over themselves to celebrate the release of these Muslim-friendly collections. Though many saw it as a cultural breakthrough, I couldn’t help but take a more cynical position. Sales of luxury goods in the Middle East hit $8.7bn last year, and Muslims worldwide spent $266bn on luxury goods in 2013, it becomes clear what truly motivates these brands in their production of “modest” clothing.
Perhaps we should remember that Dolce & Gabbana is the same brand that released a collection in 2012 featuring white models wearing black women’s faces as earrings and clothes, inspired by the racist depictions of black Moors in the 13th-century Sicilian Opera dei Pupi. Given this, I’m reluctant to believe that only a few years later they suddenly care about accommodating a maligned ethnic community.
As a Muslim woman and the intended target consumer, I thought that the pale white model wearing the clothing served as yet another stark reminder that eastern culture may only be celebrated when it is glamorised by western society, which can in turn capitalise on it. In the context of global Islamophobia, there is something that makes me feel quite uneasy seeing a towering white woman praised for looking glamorous in the same clothing that often leaves Muslim women perceived as “extremist” and puts them at risk of being attacked or even criminalised in some western societies.
This range rather looks like an appropriation of existing traditions without giving them any real recognition. The fashion industry has been hugely successful in Muslim countries for many years now, and Muslim women around the globe have been extremely inventive in creating fashionable looks that allow high fashion clothing to conform to guidelines of Islamic dress. Muslim women often seek inspiration from countless fashion blogs and social media dedicated to presenting modest yet stylish outfits.
D&G seems to recognise Muslim fashion, and want to profit from it too. But as the prominent British Muslim fashion blogger and designer Dina Torkia recently wrote, “I dreamed of being included in the mainstream of haute couture, & whilst D&G have managed to recognise us with this collection, they’ve also managed to exclude us.”
It is difficult for me to feel excited and grateful for a fashion line that supposedly caters to me and the requirements of my faith, when it feels as though the overwhelming message is that the only desirable Muslim is a wealthy one; that Muslim fashion is acceptable, but only when legitimised by a major western fashion label. And that ultimately western society will always have the monopoly on what is fashionable and relevant.
Dolce & Gabbana is to launch a collection of hijabs and abayas targeting wealthy Muslim women in the Middle East.
The debut line by the Italian luxury fashion house features headscarves and the loose, full-length outer garment favoured by some Muslim women.
The hijabs come in sheer georgette and satin weave charmeuse fabrics, with D&G signature lace detailing on the hems. The Arabian edition of Style.com, the fashion website where the pieces were revealed, reported: “They also appear to feature a lightweight and dramatic drape.”
There is also a nod to the D&G spring collection with hijabs printed with daisies, lemons and red roses.
Stefano Gabbana, co-founder of the luxury brand, announced the launch of the collection on his Instagram account using the hashtag #dgabaya.
No information has been released on how much the pieces will cost or in which regions the garments will be available.
The line received a warm reaction from some. Dina Gharbo tweeted: “Beautiful! I think I just found this year’s Eid outfit.” Another woman, Nicole Restrepo, posted on Facebook: “Stunning clothing! I would love to buy them for a economical price … I’m not a Muslim but I love the style.”
Others, however, were more sceptical and described the move as a marketing ploy.
In recent years brands such as DKNY, Oscar de la Renta, Tommy Hilfiger, Mango and Monique Lhuillier have produced one-off collections featuring flowing gowns and wide-leg trousers, often sold around Ramadan.
Muslim style bloggers have been collaborating with brands. Dina Tokio, a British fashion blogger, launchedd a scarf collection with Liberty. There has also been an increase in halal beauty products such as water-permeable and wash-off nail polishes.
Globally, Muslims spent $266bn (about £180bn) on clothing and footwear in 2013 – more than the total fashion spending of Japan and Italy combined, according to a recent report by Thomson Reuters. The report said spending was expected to reach $484bn by 2019.
A recent report from Bain management consultancy found that sales of personal luxury goods in the Middle East hit $8.7bn in 2015, up from $6.8bn the year before.
D&G operates 13 stores and boutiques in the United Arab Emirates and has multiple outposts across Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia.
D&G is one of the first major luxury labels to create a collection with nods to Middle Eastern culture and addressing the specific need for traditional pieces such as the abaya and the sheyla headscarf.
The Japanese clothing company Uniqlo has launched a collection by the Muslim fashion blogger Hana Tajima that includes loose blouses, skirts and dresses along with the more traditional kebaya and hijab.
Last autumn H&M featured its first female Muslim model, Mariah Idrissi, in a promotional campaign.
Cinven, the private equity group, has bought Kurt Geiger, the largest retailer of luxury footwear in Europe, in a deal worth £245m.
Kurt Geiger, founded on London’s Bond Street in 1963, makes £30m-plus in profits annually on sales of around £260m. Its shoes and boots are regularly worn by celebrities such as the singer Rihanna.
Cinven has had stakes in a number of well-known UK companies, including Allied Carpets, Fitness First, Gala Coral, Spire Healthcare, William Hill and United Biscuits. It has bought the business from the US private equity group, Sycamore Partners.
“Kurt Geiger represents an exciting opportunity to acquire the UK’s leading women’s footwear and accessories company with significant international growth and consolidation opportunities,” said Maxim Crewe, a partner at Cinven.
Kurt Geiger’s management team, led by chief executive Neil Clifford, will be staying on after the deal. Clifford said: “Our ambitions are significant and we believe Kurt Geiger will continue its successful track record of delivering strong growth both domestically and on the international stage.”
Earlier this month another shoe chain, the Office Retail Group, was bought by the South African retailer Truworths for £256m.
Cinven sees significant expansion opportunities, especially in digital and international markets where it has been building a presence. It also says that the UK footwear market, currently worth £8bn a year, is forecast to grow by 3% annually. It is also eyeing up the children’s footwear market.
Kurt Geiger was bought by Jones Group, a US fashion group, in 2011, which was then acquired by Sycamore after running up losses.
Inditex, the owner of clothing retailer Zara, has said it is optimistic about its prospects in China despite the slowing economy, claiming mid-market brands were not feeling the pinch.
It came as the group, whose founder, Armancio Ortega, briefly overtook Bill Gates as the world’s wealthiest man this year, reported an overall sales rise of 16% to €14.7bn (£10.6bn) in the first three quarters of this year, with profits up 20% to €2.02bn.
While luxury western brands such as Burberry have struggled in the Chinese downturn, bosses at the Spanish retail group, which also has Massimo Dutti, Bershka and Oysho in its portfolio, remain upbeat.
“We have no doubt that the fashion appetite in China is large, our brands are better and better known. We are still feeling very optimistic,” said Pablo Isla, the chief executive.
Inditex has 514 stores in China, where it makes about 7% of its sales. Although growth in the country is predicted to fall to 6% in 2016, per capita income is forecast to rise from an average of $7,000 (£4,600) to $12,000 over the next five years.
The company has opened 230 new shops around the world in 2015, the same as last year, bringing the total to 6,913 in 88 countries. Spain has the most, with 1,824 shops, followed by China and Russia.
Zara had the most new openings with 60 stores. There were also 44 new Zara Home outlets and 26 new branches for the underwear chain Oysho – significantly accelerating their expansion.
At the same time Zara’s online operation is being extended to cover all of the European Union, Taiwan and Hong Kong, while zarahome.com has launched in Australia.
The company said it added 13,079 new jobs in the past 12 months, of which 3,291 were in Spain – which is still struggling with mass unemployment with more than one in five out of work.
Inditex employs 146,478 people globally and any employee with two or more years’ service receives a bonus based on 10% of the annual increase in profits.
The group’s main mid-market rivals in China are H&M and the Japanese company Fast Retailing, parent company of Uniqlo, which opened its first store in Shanghai in 2002 – four years before Inditex opened in the same city – and now has more than 400 outlets across the country.
The Japanese company plans to park its tanks on Inditex’s lawn when it opens its first store in Spain next year. It has already optioned a property on Barcelona’s main shopping thoroughfare Passeig de Gràcia but is said to be having second thoughts due to the unstable political situation in Catalonia and may opt to open in Madrid’s Gran Via instead.
Inditex emphasised the large charitable donations it has made towards helping refugees in Europe as well as organisations such as Médecins sans Frontières, Every Mother Counts and Water.org. The group’s charitable foundation has funded a number of nursery schools and health centres in Galicia, home to its founder.
Jonathan Saunders, the London fashion week designer, has announced that he is to close his label in the new year. In a statement released today, Saunders blamed “personal reasons”, and said the decision was “not one I take lightly”. Orders made by retailers from the spring/summer 2016 collection, shown in September, will be completed, and the label will then close.
In January this year, Saunders announced key investment from financier Eiesha Bharti Pasricha, which was expected to give his brand a boost. In his statement, Saunders thanked Pasricha, and his staff.
Saunders, a Glaswegian who graduated from Central Saint Martins, founded his label in 2003 and quickly became known for his talents with prints. He is the latest name on the London fashion week schedule to disappear. Richard Nicoll put his label on hiatus last year to work at Jack Wills, and Marios Schwab and Meadham Kirchhoff are also now absent. What Saunders will do next is unknown, but it is unlikely that such a high-profile designer, who counts Thandie Newton and Diane Kruger among his fans, and who is stocked by the likes of Net-a-Porter and matchesfashion.com, will vanish completely. Saunders commented: “I am very thankful for all of the friends I have across the industry, and I look forward to working with everyone again soon on future projects.”
This latest news can also be seen in the context of a year that has seen fashion rocked by a series of personnel changes. In October, it was announced that Alber Elbaz would leave Lanvin after 14 years as creative director, and that Raf Simons would leave Christian Dior after three years. It is widely believed that these changes were due to the growing demands on designers, who now often have to produce six collections a year. In his statement, Simons said he had a “desire to focus on other interests in my life”, something that was impossible in the pressure cooker of modern fashion. Saunders’ label was independent for much of its history. Without the support and staff that comes with working at a major Parisian brand, he would have been even more vulnerable to these strains.
The feeling of scepticism was palpable, according to one of the editors gathered in a suite of the Waldorf hotel in New York one September day in 2008. Victoria Beckham was about to launch her first collection and the world’s fashion press had prepared themselves for a celebrity vanity project from a former pop star with no formal training, whose personal style had, until recently, been notable for skimpy clothing and fake tan.
But Beckham’s collection of 10 dresses, shown in this low-key way was, says Sarah Bailey, editor of Red who was then deputy editor of US Harper’s Bazaar, “an extraordinary presentation, [and she] was very sweetly nervous and humble. She talked through this collection of dresses with such incredible conviction and you could almost feel hearts and minds being melted as we were sitting there. The progress from there has been meticulous and impressive.”
Those first reviews were glowing, but couldn’t contain their surprise. “The woman formerly known as Posh Spice has launched a dress collection, and, believe it or not, it’s one of the hottest things going in New York this week,” said Vogue, while the Times said: “In fact – and I can’t quite believe I’m writing this – it was a very impressive, accomplished collection, with not a single dud.”
Since then Beckham has been embraced by the hard-to-impress fashion world. Reviews for her latest collection were overwhelmingly positive. “Victoria Beckham surfed into the big league with a colourful, classy and adult collection,” wrote Suzy Menkes in Vogue. “It eradicated once and for all the Spice Girl tag – or any idea that she is not a full-on designer.”
Beckham’s label was named best brand in 2011 and 2014 at the British fashion awards, but this year she is up for the big prize at those awards – best womenswear. Up against industry heavyweights Christopher Kane and JW Anderson, if she wins on Monday night, Beckham will have consolidated her transformation from overexposed paparazzi fodder to respected fashion designer and businesswoman.
It has been a triumphant second act – after the blazing years of her Posh Spice persona and a failed attempt at a solo career, she had become better known as David Beckham’s wife, photographed endlessly, famous for being famous. But Victoria Beckham is nothing if not determined.
This was always obvious from the beginning, as if she can turn a dream into reality through sheer force of will – and graft. After answering an advert in the Stage for an audition for a new girl band, Beckham joined the Spice Girls. They would go on to be one of the most successful bands of the 1990s. She has said she knows she is not the best singer or dancer or possessor of supermodel looks, but that she has always worked hard and made the best of what she has.
“When I was at school, I was never naturally the brightest of students,” she said in an interview last year. “Then I went to theatre college and I was never the most talented. I have always had to work ... I’m not sitting back and waiting for things to come to me: I will go out and get it.”
“It’s always been very much about her vision,” says the fashion designer Antonio Berardi, who has known Beckham for years (he designed those memorable matching purple outfits the Beckhams wore at their wedding). If she wasn’t an entirely natural pop star, she appears to be a natural designer, I suggest. “This is her voice in its pure form right now,” says Berardi, “and I think it just goes to show how good it is.”
She was always interested in fashion, he says. “She’s always been very aware of what she likes and what she wants to wear. She’s never been a person to work with a stylist – she’s always had her own vision.” When she visited his studio to choose clothes, she was always very aware of what suited her, and what was going on in fashion.
In the Spice Girls, Victoria was the supposedly classy one, with her black dresses and sleek bob. Being Posh Spice helped her later career, says John Illsley, a valuation director for the brand valuation company Intangible Business. “She was always positioned within the Spice Girls as the one who was more stylishly dressed, and the image that she was allowed to portray in the group was one which more suited a move into a fashion-based brand than perhaps the other four.”
Her marriage to David Beckham helped by keeping her in the public eye even as her singing career waned, although the idea that she was grasping on to her husband’s fame is unfair: Victoria was an integral part of the appeal of Brand Beckham and increased her husband’s status just as much as he helped hers. “She’s in pop and David got another image,” Alex Ferguson, Manchester United’s longterm manager, once complained. “He’s developed this fashion thing. I saw his transition to a different person.”
When they first got together, says Illsley, they both looked like almost any other twentysomething couple, but to see them now as “both such iconic figures is an incredible piece of brand management”.
At first, like a lot of celebrities, Beckham’s fashion career started with design partnerships that seemed more about her name than the products. She designed sunglasses, jeans and put her name to perfume. Sarah Bailey, who has interviewed Beckham several times, remembers going to the couple’s estate in Hertfordshire during this time, around 2006. “Her passion was quite evident. She had recruited a young woman from her local hairdressers to be her fit model. She was obsessively fitting the denim on this woman. It was notable how keen she was to get this right, and her seriousness.”
Beckham had essentially licensed her name to other brands, and had learned a lot about the industry, but by 2008 she was ready to go it alone. She wasn’t exactly a struggling designer straight out of Central St Martins – the label was established with the Beckham millions, and backed with not just financial investment from their manager, Simon Fuller (he owns a third of the company), but also vital structure. Fuller gave her Zach Duane, lawyer and his vice-president of business development, to be the fledgling label’s chief executive. Melanie Clark, who had worked for the designer Roland Mouret – also backed by Fuller – became Beckham’s head designer.
She now employs a team of 150, and has always been open about the way she works, given her lack of training. “I can draw, but badly,” she has said. “I think that’s OK. No one’s expecting me to do it the normal way.” Other members of her team may be drawing and pattern cutting, but she insists the vision is hers. “When I’m starting work on the collection, I just sit with my team and talk to them about what I like, what I find inspiring, what I’m desiring, what I want to wear, what I haven’t done before.”
Lucy Yeomans, editor-in-chief of Porter magazine, also remembers the first presentation of Beckham’s collection. “What was most impressive from the word go was the way she tackled it. It would have been so easy for her to have capitalised on her celebrity and had a big show and filled the front row with famous friends, and she actually did it in an intelligent, low-key way. I don’t even think David or the family went to any of [her later catwalk] shows until much further down the line. She went in quite humbly: ‘I’m just starting out, this is what I’m doing’.”
Jim Gold, president and chief merchandising officer of upmarket US department store Neiman Marcus, admits to initial worries about stocking the collection. “We had our reservations when we first met with Victoria,” he says. “Over time, we had met with numerous celebrities aspiring to break their way into the fashion industry, but only a select few seemed willing to commit the time and energy required to build a brand that could stand the test of time. Victoria has been an exception and a shining example of what it takes to succeed in our industry.”
She has evolved as a designer relatively quickly, says Yeomans. “Her more recent collections are very modern and feel like they sit in that fashion world rather than just being a dress collection. She’s softened the silhouettes.” Victoria Beckham is one of the 25 bestselling brands on Net-a-Porter, the designer fashion online retailer, Yeomans says. And the clothes are not cheap: a simple silk top is £750, dresses are over £1,000 and coats are upwards of £2,000 (she also has a lower-priced label, Victoria).
“People can see her seriousness, and real women who have the money are very happy to buy those clothes,” says Bailey. “They don’t do it because they’re turned on by celebrities – they do it because those clothes are amazing staple pieces to have in your wardrobe if you’re lucky enough to afford them.”
Last year, Management Today named Beckham top of its list of 100 entrepreneurs, pointing out her turnover had grown from £1m to £30m in just five years.
In person, says Bailey, Beckham is very different from the unsmiling, sullen woman often associated with her public image. “I think she is often misunderstood. She is incredibly funny, witty and has an understanding of how she has been perceived over the years. I have noticed her confidence increase around this fashion conversation over the years, and she has won people over. There is a modesty about her that is appealing.”
At the end of her last show in September during New York fashion week, after showing a collection of loose, breezy pieces that felt fresh and modern, Beckham came out – only briefly – to take her applause, and she looked almost bashful. “First time around I felt famous,” she said last year. “But now I feel successful.”
Career: She auditioned for a new girl band in 1994. The Spice Girls’ first single, Wannabe, went to number one in dozens of countries, and the band went on to sell more than 50m records. As a solo artist, she had four top 10 singles, but disappointing album sales. Beckham designed jeans and sunglasses for other brands, then launched her own denim label in 2006. She unveiled her first high-end womenswear collection in September 2008, with a lower-priced line following in 2011. In 2014, she opened her flagship store in London.
High point: Becoming one of the biggest pop stars in the world with the Spice Girls. Rave reviews for her debut fashion collection and winning her first British Fashion award in 2011
Low point: Beckham’s first solo album failed to sell, and her next two albums were not released. Weathering rumours about marriage difficulties.
They say: “She sold 80m records, she has a stunning husband and beautiful children, and she has had real success in her career as a designer. And she’s very sweet and very funny. She can look cold, but she is not, she’s cheerful.” Karl Lagerfeld
She says: “I always wanted to be a fashion designer. Then along came the Spice Girls which opened a lot of doors for me. And, let’s be honest, closed a lot. But those days are over. I was never going to be the world’s best singer, but I hope I can be a good designer.”
The first decade of the 21st century was a boom time for corporate sustainability. Iconic US companies, including GE, IBM, Walmart and Google, embraced the movement. Fortune 500 firms published their first corporate social responsibility (CSR) reports. Conferences, consultants and awards proliferated.
Timberland – where I worked for 15 years through 2007 – won more than its share of plaudits. One personal highlight was attending the 2002 ceremony at the White House, where Timberland received the Ron Brown Award for Corporate Leadership, joining the ranks of other US exemplars of corporate citizenship such as UPS, General Mills, HP, Alcoa, Johnson & Johnson, SC Johnson, Procter & Gamble and many more.
And yet, while these companies surely did good work, awards like this are based largely on subjective judgments. They reflect commitments – from these and almost every company addressing sustainability – made with good intentions, but that have, by and large, failed to create real change when it comes to global climate.
Notwithstanding the stream of reported improvements in corporate practices – improvements that run the risk of giving us false comfort – global greenhouse gas emissions grew by almost 30% between 2000 and 2012, according to the World Resources Institute. An absence of useful metrics, shared standards and comparability slows progress and calls into question the efficacy of corporate sustainability at a time when environmental challenges have never been more acute.
As chief operating officer of Timberland, I worked to demonstrate the ultimate compatibility of profitability and sustainability. During my tenure, Timberland was a publicly traded company on the New York Stock Exchange. It was controlled by the third generation of the founding Swartz family and led by Jeff Swartz, a passionate and progressive CEO. The company succeeded by focusing on what it called “Boot” (a proxy for product excellence), “Brand” (shorthand for customer experience) and “Belief” (in a values-led enterprise).
Timberland’s “Belief” agenda was extensive. The company was the first in the US to extend 40 hours of paid leave per year to employees for community service. It was a founding sponsor of the urban service corps City Year, an early purchaser of renewable energy, and one of the first companies to issue a CSR report.
Much of this agenda was driven by Jeff Swartz. In mid-2005, Swartz invited his senior staff to a meeting of show-and-tell where he displayed a bottle of Russian salad dressing. Jeff called our attention to the nutrition label, and gave the team six months to provide equal transparency to consumers of Timberland’s 20m pairs of footwear. That meant sharing the footprint – in energy, other natural resources and human capital – of the product line.
Some 18 months later, Timberland debuted its Green Index nutrition label. The work took three times longer than expected and required a series of compromises. For example, we found that greenhouse gas emissions data for many items on Timberland’s bills of materials did not exist. Nor did the emissions measures for related transportation.
The fact that we bought leather from multiple suppliers, finished goods from factories that were shared with other brands, and did business all over the world (using electricity made from a variety of sources) only magnified the measurement challenges. Notwithstanding these complexities, Timberland published Green Index labels for all of its footwear, providing estimates of energy use, community impact and recycled content.
This work served as an impetus for the Eco Index, created by the Outdoor Industry Association (OIA), which was absorbed by the HIGG Index, engineered by the Sustainable Apparel Coalition. From that single bottle of Russian salad dressing emerged a set of industry standards that are used by many of the world’s biggest footwear and apparel companies, including Nike, Walmart, H&M and Inditex.
Accomplishments such as these are touted as evidence of progress toward a more sustainable future. Headlines proclaim corporate carbon reduction targets heading into COP21 United Nations Conference on Climate Change. The sustainability movement points to increases in CSR reporting and socially responsible investments as proof of progress.
But for all the good work of companies like Timberland, as well as many NGOs, it now seems evident to me that systemic barriers are overwhelming all the good intentions. Consider, for example, that 10 years after the wave of new CSR reports and the introduction of Timberland’s Green Index, there is still not a single, audited, comparable, accepted standard for reporting of corporate carbon emissions. Companies set their own emissions targets, using whatever baseline they choose.
On its website, Timberland, now part of VF Corporation, reports that it has reduced emissions by 50% from 2006 to 2014. Unfortunately, the measured emissions take into account only the footprint of Timberland’s owned facilities, and its employee travel representing only 4% of Timberland’s overall greenhouse gas footprint. Emissions resulting from the raw materials used to produce Timberland’s product and from Timberland’s sourced factories, where most of its apparel and footwear are made, are not reported.
This measurement gap is by no means unique to Timberland. Most companies’ greenhouse gas emissions reporting is similarly incomplete. Patagonia, for instance – largely regarded as an environmental leader – does not report its full CO2 footprint. Neither does Gap.
Reporting on “non-financial” environmental impacts like greenhouse gas emissions, water usage and waste is enormously complicated. Despite the proliferation of sensors, mobile phones, GPS and traceability software, most companies don’t track their products through multiple tiers of suppliers all the way back to the source – from a T-shirt back to a cotton farmer, for example. The rise of fast fashion has further complicated matters because of its rapid cycles.
Unlike financial reporting, sustainability reporting is unregulated and entirely voluntary. Non-financial measures in the form of megajoules, kilowatt-hours, liters and metric tons are typically disconnected from key performance indicators for businesses. Collecting the data adds cost, but it does not necessarily lead to more insight or improved practices.
Finally, incentives are misaligned. Unpriced externalities (of carbon emissions, for example) socialize costs while price subsidies for inputs such as water inflate profits. While consumers tell researchers that they care about sustainability, there’s little evidence in the footwear and apparel space that they are willing to pay extra or seek out greener alternatives.
Absent consumer demand for more information about sustainability, much of what companies know remains hidden. The HIGG Index has yet to appear on consumer-facing labels, and Timberland quietly removed its “nutrition label” from its shoes and boots earlier this year.
All of this points to the limits of voluntary corporate commitments, particularly in the absence of science-based, comparable and transparent metrics that would allow stakeholders to evaluate one company against another. The nonprofit Sustainability Accounting Standards Board is a step in the right direction. So too are the efforts to promote integrated reporting.
Solving the environmental challenges of our time will require much more than translating data into insight. We’ll need technological breakthroughs, particularly focused on energy; new business models, like those in the sharing economy; and, ultimately, proper pricing of natural capital, driven by government regulation. But in the meantime, companies should make it a priority to bring the seriousness and rigor of financial reporting to the measurement of environmental impact.
Nothing inspires the use of angry caps lock on social media like the combination of women’s bodies and the fashion industry – and Twitter outrage around the term “plus size” has recently been in boundless supply. To wit: many campaigners have been calling for an increased use of larger models. Others have complained that plus-size models are not plus-sized enough. Still more have accused those initial campaigners of “skinny shaming” and promoting obesity while, apparently, “curve” models and “inbetweenies” are on the rise. All in all, the bodies of plus-size models are becoming as much a source of debate and ire as those of their “straight-sized” counterparts. Progress, eh? And if you have no idea what any of those terms mean, here’s a quick guide.
As diversity of size in modelling has become a hot topic so, too, has this US phrase. Most “straight size” models are a UK 8 – that’s the dress size designers usually send out as samples for photoshoots – but it can refer to “those who are likely to be below a size 10 who work on a company’s main board, women’s board, image board or new faces board,” says Anna Shillinglaw, owner of Milk Management. Those “boards” all have nuanced definitions of their own. “The main board, or the women’s board, are the girls you see in Next and Marks & Spencer’s campaigns; they are size 8-10 and quite established,” she says. “The ‘image board’ girls look more, unique, less commercial, and do editorial in high-fashion magazines.” And then there are “new” or “future faces”, who, like a Tom Cruise passion project, are currently “in development”: often unable to work properly, being under 16 (another bone of contention, of course) and preparing their careers with look books and test shots. Another term that might stick in the craw here is “girls”: one seasoned model agent admits they have “never heard anyone call a model a woman, even if they are 30”.
Oh, it’s complicated. This is the term the fashion industry has traditionally used for models who do not conform to what Joan Rivers called the “does my tampon make me look fat?” look, but are often nowhere near the average size of a British woman (a 16). “I used to be a straight size model myself, then my agent suggested I did plus-size modelling,” says Shillinglaw. “I was shocked – I was only a size 10 or 12, very small for plus size. But then I chilled out a bit, I wasn’t dieting, gained a bit of weight and it was fine. In fact, it was great going to castings and not having to worry about whether I would fit into samples.” Although Shillinglaw recently signed Tess Holliday, a size 26 model, the most in-demand tend to be a UK size 14 to 16. That makes them significantly smaller than the clothes they are posing in, as size 22 model Olivia Campbell told The Guardian in September: “It’s very common for e-commerce brands to use size 12 models to showcase ranges that don’t even start until a size 18, and then pin the clothes to their bodies,” she said. In reality most powerhouse London agencies have few plus sized models on their books, even if disproportionate media coverage would suggest otherwise. Says Richard Storer of fashion PR and management agency Eleventen: “There are of course plus-size models, some of whom get a lot of buzz; it’s something for the media to grab and make a story out of without genuine purpose or conscious debate around the issues that surround the subject as a whole. Another guaranteed story, every season, is that a perceived ‘too thin girl’ will get hounded by the press for being unhealthy, even though she may be naturally that shape. I’m not sure that is very helpful, either.”
The agencies who do have models above sample size now tend to use the word “curve”, instead of plus size. “Curve is a nicer term and it can mean anything and anyone – including someone slim with a bigger bust,” says Shillinglaw. That word still gets some people’s goats because it suggests a differentiation is required from the size 6 to 8 fashion “norm”. But it is “plus-sized” that has become a truly dirty word for some: those calling out for the term to be consigned to the annals of fashion history include Australian model Stefania Ferrario, the woman behind a social media campaign urging the industry to #Droptheplus. Bridesmaids actor Melissa McCarthy – whose own size 4 to 28 clothing line has been so successful it has been credited with inspiring a revolution in US fashion retail – has also spoken out against the “segregation” of shoppers, and is calling for simple “inclusivity”. For Shillinglaw, curve is a necessary business distinction in modelling, not least because many designers only send out size 8 samples: “If the samples came in bigger sizes, that’s when you would see a change,” she says.
Myla Dalbesio, a UK size 14, calls herself an “inbetweenie” model: “We’re not skinny enough to be straight size, like these [US] size zero and size two girls, and we’re not big enough to be plus size,” she explained. Similarly, Robyn Lawley, a UK size 12, has been described as “the queen of the inbetweenies”. Seemingly, this is a sign of evolution in fashion, suggesting that models need not conform to either sample size or plus, but, for most, the reality is less cheering. Rosie Nelson, a model who was asked to lose weight at size 8, says: “In my experience, the inbetweenie model isn’t something that reflects the demand for skinny models on a day-to-day basis with clients,” she says. “To me, it seems like another label being used by designers and retailers to appear more inclusive of a wider range of body types. The harsh reality of the industry is that the thinner you are, the more work you will get.” And if your figure nudges over a size 6-8, she says, “your agency will definitely notice and tell you to ‘fix your measurements’.”
With celebrities posting photoshopped “thigh goals” photographs to millions of followers on Instagram every day, do fashion images still have much influence? Fashion commentator and diversity campaigner Caryn Franklin believes they do: “We make social comparisons between ourselves and the models we see; body image anxiety can occur because of the repetition and authority fashion has in our lives,” she says. “Fashion has normalised an appearance that is not the norm, so this is affecting body confidence of both women and men.” Franklin is another critic of the term plus size, which she says is an unhealthy label to put on a model with an average BMI. “Students in Liverpool came up with the term ‘life-sized’ as a more honest label for models who are larger than straight fashion models. I love it,” she says. Those whose Twitter thumbs are primed for examples of skinny shaming would probably object to super-slimness being differentiated from the size of life, of course – with the battle for serene, blanket body-acceptance likely to remain a work in progress.
She has been accused of being an apologist for obesity, attacked for her own body size, been snubbed by Victoria Beckham and been the recipient of at least one angry letter from a leading model agency.
But Conservative MP Caroline Nokes says she has become more passionate, rather than less, to take on the “arrogant” fashion industry and is determined to take her cause to the very heart of government policy – and she has no qualms about bringing the full force of legislation with her.
Nokes is the latest public figure to take up the long-running battle to persuade designers, fashion houses, retailers and modelling agencies to take more responsibility in how they represent the female form and to stop the widespread use of underage and underfed models on the catwalks, on advertising hoardings and in glossy magazines.
While there have been calls for ultra-thin models to be banned from London’s catwalks for more than a decade – in 2006, Tessa Jowell, who was then culture secretary, made the case – this time, says Nokes, there will be more than just another skirmish.
As chair of the all-party parliamentary group on body image, Nokes has picked up the baton with alacrity, publicly calling shame on the industry for “its wall of silence” on the issue of super-skinny models, who are part of a wider body-image problem. The committee will have an evidence session at the beginning of next month and has opened consultations to help it investigate whether legislation is needed to keep very thin models away from British catwalks.
Nokes said there had been a “wonderful response” from health experts and academics on the issues, but no response from modelling agencies and fashion designers who had been asked to take part in the consultation.
“They all got our letters. But they are either too scared or too arrogant to engage in a conversation,” she says. “This is not a confrontation, this is a debate. If someone can come forward and offer an explanation of why a size six woman is too large to model clothes when the average woman in this country is a size 16, then I am very happy to hear it. I’d like to know about why a sample size cannot be made in a size 10. I want to understand their justification. Because I think they are perpetrating a myth that only the sub-size six figure is desirable.”
The investigation came after a petition calling for fashion week health checks on models last month reached 30,000 signatures. The petition was started by Rosie Nelson, a size eight model originally from Australia, who had been rejected by a British modelling agency until she was able to drop her body size “down to the bone”.
“When I walked into one of the UK’s biggest model agencies last year, they told me I ticked all the boxes except one – I needed to lose weight. So I did,” she said. “Four months later, I lost nearly a stone, two inches off my hips. When I returned to the same agency, they told me to lose more weight, they wanted me ‘down to the bone’.” Other countries have already acted; Israel, where anorexia is a major public health issue, brought in a body-mass index (BMI) limit for working models and regulations on photoshopping in 2012. Catwalk models in Italy must show health certificates under a self-regulation code, Spain enforces a BMI limit and France passed a law in April stopping models from appearing on catwalks who had a BMI of less than 18 – meaning a 5ft 10in woman must weigh at least 8.9 stones. Anyone hiring a model below that can face a fine or a six-month prison sentence. World Health Organisation guidelines state that an adult with a BMI below 18 is malnourished. Yet, according to estimates, the average model working in fashion shows today has a BMI of 16, meeting the criteria for “severely malnourished” or anorexic.
But neither Nelson nor Nokes are in favour of seeing models rated on their BMI, because they agree with many health experts that it is an imperfect way to measure an individual’s health.
There are also reports of it working against the women concerned. Writing in the New York Observer earlier this year, former model Jennifer Sky said models working in Spain were told to work round the BMI weigh-ins by wearing weights in their hair and Spanx-style underwear lined with sand.
“I don’t think BMI is the right measure, because many models I know are size six to eight, and very conscious of their health and fitness,” said Nelson, who instead wants a mandatory health check for models every three to six months.
Nokes is also against the BMI. “It’s a lousy measure for an individual’s health,” said the MP for Romsey and Southampton North. “I’m the first to acknowledge that legislation is not the answer for everything, but we are faced with an industry that’s out of step and thinking it can just go along with the situation, while health experts and academics are deeply concerned about the impact [it’s having] on our young people.”
Nokes says that she has heard from models recently who say they have seen some changes, but these appear to be minor things, such as seeing more fresh fruit and water being made available at photo-shoots. While these sorts of moves might promote good health, they are unlikely to make a difference to body size.
“At the same time, we are hearing that hundreds and hundreds of young women are regarded as disposable commodities by an industry that they are desperate to get into, because they see it as glamorous and well-paid when, in fact, the polar opposite is true,” she says. “It’s far from glamorous, it’s exploitative, and it may be well paid for a few individuals but not everyone can be Kate Moss.
“For most young girls, the reality is that they’ll be regarded as washed up when they are 18.”
She says that the situation has become worse as the industry’s definition of curvy has come to mean thinner and thinner models.
In what some would describe as the heyday of modelling – when supermodels such as Linda Evangelista, Cindy Crawford and Claudia Schiffer reigned supreme – the normal model size was more like an eight or a 10. Nokes points out that it is perverse that while the average size of ordinary people has been rising over many years, the size of models has dropped. She points to research from the United States that suggested that 20 years ago the average fashion model weighed 8% less than the average woman, while today she weighs 23% less.
“And it’s not just size,” adds Nokes. “We’re hearing from models currently inside this industry about the murkier side, about the pressures, the extremes, and while we’ve been told by agencies for years that they are cleaning up their act, it seems they are only chipping away.
“I’d really like someone to come forward and explain to me why a size six woman is being told that her hips are too wide to be suitable to showcase clothes and why size 10 women are herded off to the plus-size section.”
Nokes said she was finding more support for action among her political peers, saying that male and female MPs were meeting an increasing number of constituents worried about young people and the pressures of body image feeding into cyber bullying.
“We have growing mental health issues among young people, and while the rise in social media is a definite factor, and so is exam pressure, this body-image pressure has huge ramifications,” she said. “What I’m conscious of so far is that this industry as a whole is clinging to an image of beauty which is unattainable and damaging, and that it is very, very reluctant to engage in why it is so wedded to this idea of a body that’s only found on androgynous teenagers.”
■ In June, an Yves Saint Laurent advertisement was banned by the Advertising Standards Authority for featuring an “unhealthily underweight” model.
■ Chanel’s Karl Lagerfeld infamously caused a row in 2013, saying “no one wants to see curvy women on the runway”, shortly after he had accused singer Adele of being “a little too fat”.
■ In 2010, eating-disorder campaigners spoke out against the manufacture of ever skinnier male mannequins, claiming a rise in men suffering from bulimia and anorexia was being fuelled by unrealistic body images being used in the fashion industry.
■ Model Kate Moss caused controversy in 2009 when she said one of her mottos was a phrase which is also used by many with eating disorders: “Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels”.
Kanye West has many fans, but Herbert Hainer is clearly not among them. Asked which of the American rapper’s songs he likes most during an earnings call on Thursday, the chief executive of German sportswear company Adidas laughed. “I guess I’m too old to follow Kanye’s music.” Hainer and his business will be hoping that Adidas customers are more switched on.
Next week, the latest trainer from the collaboration between the pop star and Adidas, launched under the “Yeezy” range, hits stores. If the buzz on Twitter and Instagram is to be believed, the release of a new Yeezy Boost 350 is much anticipated. 
Adidas is also hoping that its fiercest competitor takes note. The collaboration with the rapper is Adidas’s latest attempt to gain ground in its ongoing rivalry with Nike. Although the company with the three distinctive stripes presented solid third-quarter growth figures on Thursday, with sales up 13% to €4.8bn (£3.4bn) and net income up 10% to €311m, it is still struggling to catch up with its old enemy.
Last year, Nike’s revenues rose 10% to $30.6bn (£20bn). Adidas, meanwhile, reported 2% growth on revenues of €14.5bn for 2014. The gap gets even bigger once company targets are factored in: Nike recently set its revenue target for the year 2020 at $50bn. Adidas’s aim for the same date is less than half that, at €22bn.
Much of this disparity is due to the role of the US market in global sportswear, and the relative positions of Nike and Adidas within it. The country, where Nike was founded in 1964, accounted for $96.5bn of the industry’s total revenue of $268bn last year, according to research firm Euromonitor International. Western Europe, the home turf of Adidas, was worth only $56bn.
North America is not only the biggest market in terms of revenue. “It still defines what’s cool in sportswear”, says Christoph Metzelder, the former German football star and now managing director of sports marketing firm Jung von Matt/sports in Hamburg. Coolness, however, has not been a key asset for Adidas in its battle with Nike until now.
Adidas has focused on the functionality of its shoes as its main selling point. This has been the case since the company’s founder, Adi Dassler, invented a football boot with removable studs, whose suitability in all weather conditions made it an unlikely hero of the West Germany football team that won the 1954 World Cup in the “Miracle of Bern”. Until the late 1970s that worked quite well and Adidas dominated the market. But then came Nike.
Nike’s co-founder, Phil Knight, chose a different approach. When he brought in American basketball star Michael Jordan as the brand’s face in 1985, he hit a nerve. The “Air Jordan” has been lauded as the most famous sneaker ever since. 
In 2005, Adidas tried to catch up by acquiring its US competitor Reebok.Hainer, who has led Adidas since 2001, called the $3.8bn deal “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity”. But it has not paid off so far. Last year, Adidas dropped to the No 3 rank in North America for the first time, falling behind newcomer Under Armour.
But Adidas is far from giving up. Last year, the company promoted two Americans to top management roles. Mark King, who previously ran the golf division TaylorMade, is now overseeing the North America business, while Eric Liedtke is taking care of the group’s brands. Adidas has also hired three of Nike’s top designers to join its newly established design studio in Brooklyn – a more trendy workplace than the company’s headquarters in the rural Bavarian town of Herzogenaurach.
Finally the company signed Kanye West, who previously was Nike’s brand ambassador. In Thursday’s earnings call Hainer did not want to comment on how much Adidas pays for the rapper’s commitment. Analysts estimate it to be a multi-million dollar investment. West himself said earlier this year that Nike has offered him $4m per year to stay, but had disappointed him by failing to offer royalties. Adidas spends more than 13% of annual sales on marketing, which is above the industry average of around 10%.
Despite the frenzy among Kanye fans whenever a new “Yeezy” goes on sale, industry experts are doubtful about the size of the benefit it brings to Adidas. “Such collaborations will continue to help the company’s brands bolster sales in the short term, but they are unlikely to provide a significant boost to long term revenues”, says Natasha Cazin, analyst at Euromonitor International.
Stars come and go, and so do customers and their fashion preferences. “Young consumers are not as loyal as their older counterparts, they switch brands quite often”, says Metzelder. Brands can soon be forgotten, he adds. “Who would have thought that a brand like Nokia could disappear?”
While Adidas is pushing for greater success in the US, Nike is making gains in the core business of its German rival: football. Although Adidas is official partner of the German football federation DFB until 2018 and and Fifa until 2030, some domestic stars do not feel a patriotic pull when it comes to footwear. In the World Cup final last year, Germany’s Mario Götze scored the winning goal in a pair of neon yellow Nike boots.
Recently, Adidas’s American rivals have targeted a long-time neglected customer group in the sportswear market: women. Nike has started a womenswear collaboration with Sacai, a Japanese label overseen by former Comme des Garçons designer Chitose Abe. Under Armour has also signed supermodel Gisele Bündchen for an advertising campaign.
Next year the marketing battlefield will move south, from the US to Brazil for the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. Unlike in the London and Beijing games, Adidas is not an official sponsor – this time it is Nike’s turn. “We decided to use the money otherwise,” Hainer said. For Adidas, the hope is that Kanye will make a significant contribution to the fightback.
Sometimes fashion can seem like a merry-go-round of catwalk shows with a whirlwind of collections hitting stores almost hourly. Last week an industry moving at an ever higher speed almost crashed.
On Wednesday, it was announced that Alber Elbaz would be leaving French house Lanvin, after 14 years as creative director. This followed the news last week that Raf Simons, the respected Belgian designer, would exit Christian Dior after three and a half years, his contract not renewed. They were two high-profile departures that appeared to confirm a widely held belief: the increasingly hectic search for markets and sales is taking a heavy toll on those who must come up with the ideas to feed the beast.
Elbaz, it has emerged, was let go by Lanvin and its majority shareholder, Shaw-Lan Wang. The designer, in a statement, thanked his staff and clients and added: “I wish the house of Lanvin the future it deserves among the best French luxury brands, and hope that it finds the business vision it needs to engage in the right way forward.”
What this future may hold is unclear but parting ways with Elbaz suggests the house, founded by Jeanne Lanvin in 1889 and revived by Elbaz’s appointment in 2001, is responding to slowing growth and searching for another direction. It is thought that additional investment is necessary and Wang’s hard bargaining to get the right amount of cash injection had caused a rift between her and Elbaz, a designer who was much adored for his feminine but wearable clothes, as well as his own trademark look of bow tie and glasses. The protests by those in the Lanvin atelier after his dismissal showed how well-liked he is.
Simons, meanwhile, is thought to have left Dior in an attempt to preserve a work-life balance – and focus on his own label. In his statement, released last week, he said his decision was “based entirely and equally on my desire to focus on other interests in my life, including my own brand, and the passions that drive me outside my work”.
Some argue that, for Simons, the Dior gig was a means to an end – providing enough money for his eponymous label, with its street-based aesthetic, to move to the next level.
Is fashion’s current business model – where designers are expected to create at least six collections a year – sustainable? After Simons’ departure, esteemed fashion journalist Suzy Menkes wrote an article on Vogue’s website entitled “Why fashion is crashing”, bemoaning a world where a designer is expected to make six collections a year, as well as satisfy press commitments, a social media profile and personal appearances at client events around the world. Namechecking the morality tales of John Galliano and Marc Jacobs’ substance abuse issues, she wrote “designers – by their nature sensitive, emotional and artistic people – are being asked to take on so much. Too much.” She went on to praise Simons for “his brave stand”.
The Elbaz news brought further impassioned pleas from the industry. Sarah Mower, Vogue’s chief critic and the British Fashion Council’s ambassador for emerging talent, used her article on Elbaz to ask “exactly what place of strife has today’s fashion industry become?” Speaking to the Observer, she suggested there was a disconnect at the heart of fashion between creativity and commerce. “We only ever get to talk to designers, we never get the commercial perspective,” she said.
“It would be nice to hear from their side. They are under enormous pressure because of the luxury market in China. When that growth starts to plateau, that’s when there are problems.” Mower says the almost endless production of new designs by creatives is “worse than churning [them out].”
Richard Nicoll, a successful London fashion week designer, put his business on hold last year when the breakneck speed of fashion took its toll.
“It was not rewarding,” he said. “I was doing six [collections a year] and not enjoying it. It’s hard to keep doing them with integrity and authority when they’re so frequent. I fell out of love with it by the end.”
Nicoll has since worked for high street brand Jack Wills, and is enjoying freelancing. He has plans to relaunch his own label at some point but “in a very different way”. Perhaps designers might take note of Azzedine Alaïa’s approach. The much-respected Tunisian-born, Paris-based designer refuses to show his clothes as part of fashion weeks’ seasons, and instead has presentations whenever he feels ready to show a collection.
Some in the industry believe the current debate puts the focus on the wrong area. Daniel Marks, director of PR agency The Communications Store, who represents London designers including Christopher Kane and Erdem, agrees there is pressure “probably more than there ever has been, but that isn’t the reason something doesn’t work, it’s because a designer is not ably supported”.
He argues that the secret is an alliance between the commercial and creative. “I have no idea what happened at Dior and Lanvin but the key to a successful brand is the balance between creativity and commerce and a team who work together towards the same goals with mutual respect,” he says. “When you get the right CEO, that’s when success happens.”
Marks points to Kering – the fashion conglomerate that owns Gucci, Alexander McQueen, Stella McCartney and Christopher Kane – as a company where this culture is in place. “They look after their brands really well,” he says. “There’s Jonathan Ackroyd at McQueen, Sarah Crook at Christopher Kane.” Marks believes more business minds need to be attracted to fashion. “Fashion is a serious business and an extraordinary one,” he says. “We are all in the business of magic and dreams. Why would you not want to work in the fashion industry?”
As for the creative talents, the exits of Elbaz and Simons leave two positions vacant at major Parisian houses. It seems probable that Elbaz may take over at Dior. Mower hopes, however, that he takes his time.
“Alber would be very good at Dior – he loves women, he’s a great colourist and he would bring some humour,” Mower says. “But my fantasy scenario is that he will take a year out and then start his own business.”
Whatever he decides to do will ripple across the industry, and have repercussions far beyond his own career.
I am in one of the subterranean rooms that form part of the backstage rabbit warren of Somerset House in central London. This wing used to be offices for the Inland Revenue, but it is now occupied by Makerversity, a hive of young business start-ups which get to rent desk space at affordable prices. One of these businesses has just moved out of the Makerversity incubator into its own bigger space a few doors along. A workman is carrying a window through the room. It is being put back in place after it had been removed to allow access for three industrial knitting machines. This is the headquarters of Unmade, where old-fashioned knitting meets cutting-edge technology.
“We’ve got physicists, computer scientists, a user-experience expert,” says Ben Alun-Jones, one of the three founders of Unmade, which uses coding to power knitting machines as though they are 3D printers. He met Hal Watts and Kirsty Emery when they were all at the Royal College of Art. Alun-Jones and Watts did industrial design and Emery specialised in knitwear. They had an idea to apply what they knew about 3D printing to the 1980s computer-programmed knitting machine. “They can be used to make something that is useful rather than making just anything,” he says. “You press a button and a garment comes out.” It’s a far cry from the knit-and-natter sessions that were the last big knitting craze.
By enabling people – and brands – to “print” clothes to order, the whole process of clothing manufacture can be reconfigured. Unmade will never produce anything that nobody wants. It is estimated that 10% of all the clothes made in the world go straight to landfill, which, says Alun-Jones, is “insane”. “We seem to have lost something in mass production where you are making things for everyone, but everything is made for no one.”
Wool and the Gang (WATG), another technology-enabled knitwear company, would agree. The east London-based brand which specialises in hand knits – either ready knitted or in kit form to knit yourself – has just unleashed the power of its online community to raise an extraordinary £1m of funding via the micro-investment website Crowdcube.
The money will be used to grow WATG’s business in America. “The majority of our makers are in Europe and the UK, and we have a lot of people waiting to get on production in the US,” says CEO Lisa Rodwell. “It doesn’t need to be a big operation – we have proved how to do it here so it would be replicating that in the US.” The Dalston HQ employs 23 permanent staff, with extra part-timers helping with packing around the busy Christmas period (gifting is a huge part of their business).
Like Unmade, WATG has disrupted the way fashion is produced. The company has a “gang” of more than 3,000 makers – a global paid network of casual knitters, mostly women, who use WATG to generate additional income. So in February 2014, for instance, when Giles Deacon needed 250 knitted beanies to give to his London Fashion Week audience, WATG was able to produce them in just two weeks. Cara Delevingne loved her hat so much she videoed herself on the catwalk wearing it to the delight of her millions of Instagram followers (and proceeded to knit one herself). For this season, the gang made knits for the London-based designer Christopher Raeburn, including a shark-finned mitten called the Bruce Knitmitt (£99 readymade or £49 if you buy the DIY kit for advanced knitters).
“We starting discussing the idea of crowdfunding about six months ago,” Rodwell tells me. The brand’s co-founders, Aurelie Popper and Jade Harwood, both fashion and textiles graduates from Central Saint Martins, were confident that their community would want to help finance them. And 521 of them invested. “It’s been quite exciting,” says Rodwell. “We’ve had so many of our customers come in and it’s more the pledge of support.”
In 2014 the business grew 320% on 2013 and this year WATG expects to double that. The company ships to almost 70 countries and has strong growth in America, Australia and South Korea, including two department stores where people can go into the store and knit.
The WATG community share their knit and crochet creations via social media, host knitting parties for friends using WATG knitting kits, learn how to knit via the brilliant brand’s videos – everything from how to cast on to much more advanced stitches – and even help shape the product via regular “Gang Labs”, where they are invited to suggest their own designs. While this is a business built on the most basic, low-tech craft there is – nothing more than wooden sticks and balls of wool – it has grown into a global brand with people signing up for parties from the King’s Arms in Salford (where you could knit a snood in their chunky Crazy Sexy Wool) to the Little Knittery in Los Angeles.
WATG has grown up with social media. In 2008 they had the idea to post “how to” videos on YouTube and their community grew from there. “People discovered the brand as they were trying to learn to knit or to cast off or to fix their mistakes, and connected with us,” says Rodwell. “As both Facebook and Instagram took off our customers started sharing pictures of what they were making. Everybody loves to share a picture of their coffee in the morning and fashion makers love to share a picture of them drinking a cup of coffee making or wearing their latest snood.”
While WATG is all about the wild and woolly and the handmade, Unmade is about a slicker, more industrial process. But the two businesses both understand the importance of the collaborative and social aspect of creating fashion. “I think most innovative businesses today have technology as an enabler and that is the role for WATG – it’s an enabler,” says Rodwell. “We wouldn’t have been able to find a network of knitters all over the world without the internet or be able to manage quality control without the internet. We are in the fashion-making DIY business that exists thanks to the internet.”
Similarly for Unmade, the journey starts with the user. Nothing is made unless it has been ordered. The Unmade team have cracked a whole new way of producing small quantities of knitwear with endless applications. With their software, they could potentially connect to every factory in the world, making their production more efficient, and enabling any brand to create unique product as ordered by its customers.
“Knitting is the future of textiles,” says Alun-Jones. “All the things people dream of doing with 3D printers is one of the oldest things going.” Unmade is talking to designers who are interested in collaborating with them – not only in sampling their knitwear for their own production but also in creating one-off pieces that their customers will be able to order online – and within minutes of them appearing on the catwalk at next season’s London Fashion Week.
“We are building a completely new experience for the customer where you can be part of the creation process. We have made our own file format that is like an MP3 is to music – we have created a .KNIT which is a file format for knitting,” says Alun-Jones. This file format talks to a piece of technology that they have built into the knitting machine, and generates the code to knit a garment.
Unmade started their business (which they originally called Knyttan) in 2013. This summer, they raised £2m in funding, which has enabled them to expand their team to around 22 (14 are fulltime) and to steam ahead with their knitting revolution. They are building a website that will encourage the customer to be part of the creative process. One of their first collaborations is (like WATG) with Christopher Raeburn. His collection for men for S/S16 was inspired by Borneo and his Unmade knitwear designs feature an abstract version of a topographical map of the country. On the Unmade website, you will be able to move the map around a template of your sweater and select which bit of the map you want to be placed where, and in what colour. Your jumper will be unique to you.
This month Unmade launches its website and open its first pop-up shop in Covent Garden. It will be there until Christmas. There will be a knitting machine, samples to try on and a screen where you can play around with your design and, at the click of a mouse, the instore knitting machine will knit your jumper or scarf. Depending on how many other garments are in the “printer” queue, you will be able to take away your finished item or it will be sent to you a day or so later. “Ultimately we are trying to create the highest personalised garment you can have,” says Alun-Jones.
A one-off garment does, of course, come at a price: around £60 for a merino scarf and £120 for a jumper. But for Alun-Jones this is only the beginning. “Imagine a place where a more appropriate, better use of resources makes things that people want and are involved in. You want to own it and it’s something to be proud of. Knitting is amazing.”
• This article was amended on 2 November 2015 to remove information about designers and stores subject to an embargo.
Perry Ellis International, the fashion label named after its gay founder, is being sued over claims that the company’s president demanded that there are “no blacks in my ads” or “anyone who looked too gay”.
The company, which also owns the labels Original Penguin, Ping and Nike Swim, is being sued over an alleged racist and homophobic policy instilled by its president and chief operating officer, Oscar Feldenkreis.
Feldenkreis, who is due to replace his father George Feldenkreis as Perry Ellis’s chief executive early next year, is also accused of telling the plaintiff that he could avoid jury service by “telling them you hate niggers and fags”.
Perry Ellis said it “categorically denies” all the allegations.
The lawsuit, filed in a New York court on Wednesday, is brought on behalf of Joseph Cook, the president of Original Penguin’s wholesale division. Cook, who is gay, claims that he has been “forced to endure highly offensive homophobic, racial and ethnic slurs” from Feldenkreis.
On one occasion it is alleged that during a meeting to approve new adverts, Feldenkreis admonished Cook and his team to make sure there are “no blacks in my ads” and he “did not want anyone who looked too gay”. Feldenkreis then allegedly asked for all ads to be sent to him so that he could screen the models before publication.
Feldenkreis’s daughter, who is brand director of Original Penguin, also allegedly repeatedly told Cook that “my dad doesn’t like having black guys in his ads, or anyone who looks too gay”.
The extent to which the race of models is allegedly scrutinised at Perry Ellis extended to executives discussing their body colour based on a coded number system, according to the lawsuit.
On one occasion Cook replied to a discussion about one male model, who was referred to as “not 05”, to ask: “I’m bad with the codes … What is 05?” The reply he received was an image of nearly a dozen black Crayola crayons.
Cook claims in the lawsuit that he was frozen out and had his role diminished when he complained about Feldenkreis’s alleged homophobic and racist behaviour.
In a statement, the company’s lawyer said: “Perry Ellis is a company that promotes equal opportunity and a positive working environment. The company is proud of the fact that it is probably one of the most diverse companies in the apparel business following its multicultural roots, stemming from Puerto Rico and Cuba. Perry Ellis categorically denies any allegations to the contrary. The claims that have been asserted will be vigorously defended against.”
Cook’s lawyer, Douglas Wigdor, said: “It is incredible that a company founded by a gay man can now be so insensitive to others based on their sexual orientation and race.”
Charli Howard, who wrote a viral Facebook post criticising her former modelling agency for their insistence that she lose more weight, speaks to Channel 4 News about standards of beauty in the modelling industry. Discussing the power agencies have over what is seen as the ideal in the fashion industry, Charli says the decisions companies make over which type of girl to represent makes a huge difference
A fashion model who criticised her former agency in an open letter for allegedly telling her to lose weight has said she intends to continue working in the industry, but on her own terms.
Charli Howard made headlines around the world after posting on Facebook: “Here’s a big FUCK YOU to my (now ex) model agency, for saying that at 5’8” tall and a UK size 6-8 (naturally), I’m ‘too big’ and ‘out of shape’ to work in the fashion industry.”
The south Londoner’s retaliation against what she termed the fashion world’s “unobtainable” beauty standards was reported on from as far afield as Israel, New Zealand and America. Since posting, Howard said she had been “blown away by the support” she had received.
However, not all responses had been supportive, with one suggesting there may be more to the story. Replying to the original post on Facebook, Annette-Marie Kjean, head of women at Wilhelmina London, an agency which has represented Howard, wrote: “You have chosen a very public forum to air your feelings.
“In fairness you should be obliged to tell the whole truth of our experience representing you as a model. You are quick to fat shame the women in the office yet you claim that this is the precise reason why you feel hurt.
“Perhaps now is a good time to reflect upon the facts of how and why we truly decided to end our management relationship with you ... Remember that you left us once for another agency and then came back a second time asking to be with us again and we welcomed you back. You left that part out.
“After many years of trying our best with you, it is unfortunate that you still refuse to see the facts and choose to only share your opinions, much to the disservice of anyone reading your post.”
It is unclear whether Wilhelmina was the agency to which Howard was referring in her Facebook post. A woman who answered the phone at the agency on Friday morning would give no comment on the letter or Kjean’s riposte.
Howard, who is 23 and has been modelling since the age of 17, published her open letter on Tuesday evening. She wrote: “I will no longer allow you to dictate to me what’s wrong with my looks and what I need to change in order to be “beautiful” (like losing one fucking inch off my hips), in the hope it might force you to find me work.
“I refuse to feel ashamed and upset on a daily basis for not meeting your ridiculous, unobtainable beauty standards, whilst you sit at a desk all day, shovelling cakes and biscuits down your throats and slagging me and my friends off about our appearance. The more you force us to lose weight and be small, the more designers have to make clothes to fit our sizes, and the more young girls are being made ill. It’s no longer an image I choose to represent.
“In case you hadn’t realised, I am a woman. I am human. I cannot miraculously shave my hip bones down, just to fit into a sample size piece of clothing or to meet ‘agency standards’. I have fought nature for a long time, because you’ve deemed my body shape too ‘curvaceous’, but I have recently began to love my shape. I don’t have big boobs, but my bum is OK plus, a large majority of my clients are OK with this.
“And anyway, let’s face the facts: when I was seven and a half stone, I still wasn’t thin enough for you. When I went to the gym five hours a week, you still weren’t finding me work. I can’t win.
“Ironically, I do love modelling – the people I’ve met, the places I’ve visited and I am proud of the jobs I’ve done. I will continue to do it, but only on my terms. My mental and physical health is of more importance than a number on a scale, however much you wish to emphasise this.
“Until (and if) an agency wishes to represent me for myself, my body and the WOMAN I’ve become, give me a call. Until then, I’m off to Nandos.”
Amid the uproar caused by the post, Howard said her only regret was that she hadn’t done it sooner. In a blog for the Huffington post, she wrote: “I can’t help but feel ashamed for not being brave enough to stand up to my agency and for my body shape earlier (best described as a ‘pear’).
“There’s no doubt about it – modelling itself is fun, hence why I said I’ll continue to do it on my own terms. But it is not a career.” 
“The thing women have yet to learn,” Roseanne Barr once said, “is that no one gives you the power. You just take it.” I thought of those words the other day, reading about the memoir Donna Karan will publish this week. Karan set up her own label in 1984, after being fired from a job at Anne Klein; she says what she mostly remembers of that time is terror, not excitement. She sold the company 27 years later for $643m, although she almost lost her nerve and backed out of signing the papers at the 11th hour. In other words, Karan achieved what she did not because she possessed the supreme self-confidence that usually marks the alpha overachievers, but while having self-doubt as well as self-belief. She was a normal person and she took the power anyway.
I say “normal”. This being the fashion industry, normal doesn’t quite cover it. The reason she nearly backed out of that deal? Her psychic called and said that Mercury was in retrograde, which is bad vibes for signing contracts, apparently. The book also reveals her habit of being topless in the office, because she doesn’t wear a bra and likes to try on clothes as part of the design process, so “just about everyone I’ve worked with has seen my breasts”. And there’s a lot of new-agey stuff about crystals, which seem to have functioned for Karan as a kind of early-90s analogue prototype of the Headspace meditation app. But still, all of this feels more normal than the unrelatable born-to-succeed type.
You don’t have to read Karan’s memoirs to know what she thinks; it was there in her clothes, all along. Her black, stretchy, comfortable clothes with their strategically flattering drapery said to women: yes, you can be a contender, even though you have squidgy thighs and no time for ironing. The fashion industry is vilified for trying to control how women dress, look and feel. But look at it another way and you find an industry full of big, brilliant female personalities, unconventional career paths and glorious individuality. Fashion is one of the few arenas in which women can be individual, even eccentric, and still succeed. Perhaps because it is, after all, only clothes, women are given licence to triumph without having to fit the mould of laser-focused, ultra-disciplined ruthlessness that is still the dominant image of what successful women look like. In fashion, women can have messy personal lives. Karan writes in her book about how, during the period in which she fell in love with her second husband Stephan Weiss, while she was still married to Mark Karan – at the time, Weiss was also married with children – she became pregnant with what she believed was Weiss’s baby, and had an abortion.
Elsa Schiaparelli planted flower seeds in her nose, mouth and ears in the hope that she would grow a flower garden, and designed padded skeleton dresses in collaboration with Salvador Dali. Coco Chanel was wearing her boyfriend’s tweed suits over a century ago; Zandra Rhodes, now 74, still has hair the colour of a pink highlighter pen. Miuccia Prada has a Carsten Holler slide installed as an exit from her Milan office, leading to the ground level three storeys below. In most areas of public life, men are allowed their eccentricities (look at Boris Johnson); meanwhile, women are tolerated only as long as they stay within narrow parameters of convention in everything from their wardrobe to their taste in music. Fashion – a global $1.5tn industry, remember, not just a few catwalk shows – is a place where women can be unconventional without being marginalised.
But frankly, the right to be unconventional is just as important as the right to get distracted by life’s flotsam and jetsam. In 1989, Karan described herself to Time magazine as someone who “worries about her daughter and her husband, and would like to get the carpeting ordered”. The idea that the sort of person who worries about getting the carpeting ordered could become the queen of Seventh Avenue is almost subversive, so steeped are we in creation myths of successful people who pride themselves on single-mindedness. The notion of a woman who can sieze power and still have time to fret about floor coverings is, frankly, inspirational. And inspiration, after all, is what fashion is all about.
To witness the pinnacle of fashion today – in terms of both commercial might and creative endeavour – it doesn’t get much better than the Louis Vuitton show that has taken place in Paris.
According to the fashion house’s creative director, Nicolas Ghesquière, this collection was about “the frontier of the digital world” – a theme that enabled him to dress models in shimmering space-age creations while flagging up the brand’s heritage as a purveyor of very posh luggage. “It’s another way of travelling at the end of the day,” he said, “this digital travelling that we are all experiencing.”
Often when designers refer to the digital landscape they do so straightforwardly, staging catwalk “moments” or creating novelty accessories designed to break Instagram. Ghesquière’s approach on Wednesday was more conceptual: models looked like wild creatures from Mad Max or Blade Runner with pink hair or mohawks or their ears painted silver. 
There were punky biker jackets and jumpsuits, cowboy-influenced spurs and leather waistcoats, and two-tone trousers that looked like chaps. Red stripes on leather jackets recalled the US flag, but were joined by Louis Vuitton’s yellow and brown insignia rather than stars. The final looks were tulle skirts appliquéd with celluloid sequins that looked like a glamorous oil slick.
The accessories were particularly tough: leather cuffs worn on the fingers like boxers’ tape, bags covered in swirls of smudged graffiti; silver headpieces that looked as though models might be plugged into the mainframe. Even when dresses were long and flowing they were paired with squidgy-soled shoes, brogues or slingback loafers.
Video screens ran alongside and above the catwalk, images morphing from a virtual reality headset to silvery, robot curves and a voiceover quoting the video game Minecraft and Jeff Bridges in Tron.
Backstage, for half an hour, Ghesquière greeted a procession of stars who looked smaller in real life than they do on the screen – Alicia Vikander, Catherine Deneuve, Michelle Williams – to the delight of the attendant scrum of photographers. Like many in the crowd, these celebrities were either clad head to toe in Louis Vuitton or pledged their allegiance more subtly with a top or a handbag. But the influence of this collection will be felt far beyond these hardcore, moneyed fans.
Ever since Ghesquière joined Vuitton from Balenciaga, four seasons ago, his work has had a huge impact on the wider fashion world; the polo necks and sepia-toned mustard and beige 1970s vision he presented for his first Louis Vuitton collection is still being replicated by other designers and on the high street.
This season was a clear continuation of that look, but more streetwise than before. The influence of the ever-important east Asian market was clearly felt. Korean actress Doona Bae, star of the Netflix series Sense8, was a big inspiration this season, said Ghesquière, as well as the Japanese anime Evangelion and Wong Kar-Wai’s sci-fi 2046.
There has been much talk in the luxury industry about customers craving discreet, under-the-radar or unusual brands that reflect their taste and individuality rather than staying loyal to the big names whose designs are universally recognised as unapologetic signifiers of wealth – and universally copied by counterfeiters. Louis Vuitton is the biggest brand of them all – worth $28.1bn (£18bn) according to Forbes – and has answered this challenge by producing collections and collaborations aiming to marry high art with big commerce.
The show’s venue – the Frank Gehry-designed Louis Vuitton Fondation in the 16th arrondissement, of Paris – encapsulates this ambition. The 40,000 sq ft art gallery – a staggering building made of irregular glass panels rising into the sky in a ululating motion like a windmill – was opened last year at a reported cost of $143m.
As one fashion month finishes, news breaks that sets the scene for an industry shake-up next season. Balenciaga has announced the appointment of Demna Gvasalia, the 34-year-old designer of cult label Vetements, as the successor to Alexander Wang, who recently left the label after three years.
This is a daring and intriguing appointment. The fashion house founded by Cristóbal Balenciaga in Paris in 1937 is known for understated refinement: the soft curve of a cocoon coat, the precision of a bracelet-length sleeve, the cool femininity of a ballerina neckline. In Paris last week, at a Chinese restaurant in the scruffy Parisian quarter of Belleville, Vetements opened their show with a yellow T-shirt branded with the courier firm DHL and closed with a denim cut off micro mini skirt.
Alexa Chung, who recently declared herself “obsessed” with Vetements, is just one of its insider fashion fans. But even more radical than the aesthetic is the philosophy that Gvasalia brings. At Vetements, he is part of a “design collective” that deconstructs and remodels existing clothes in a deliberately non-precious way, and eschews the notion of one celebrity designer. “Fashion is so overpopulated and oversupplied with ideas that at some point in the future … the fame of a designer will not be able to assure the credibility of their work,” the collective told Tank magazine last year. “At least, that is what we hope.”
This is evidence of a new and radical direction for fashion. The turn-of-the-century boom of the luxury industry was predicated on a strategy of playing on heritage and history, with young designers mining the archives of their predecessors for “codes” and “DNA” to repackage for new customers – but this has run its course, as every fashion trend does. Saint Laurent and Gucci have recently been shaken up by young designers who have ripped up the rule book and created a whole new look for their house. At Saint Laurent, Hedi Slimane now dresses scruffy drummers and their stoner girlfriends rather than the Left Bank elite. At Gucci, Alessandro Michele has abandoned killer heels and status handbags in favour of kooky loafers and plastic hair barrettes. The two brands are currently the two bestselling labels on Net-a-Porter.
Saint Laurent and Gucci are owned by Kering, which is understandably keen to apply the same formula to Balenciaga. The 2012 appointment of Wang was daring because of his youth and American-streetwear aesthetic, but the designer seemed overly polite and reverential in the role, and the pairing never set the fashion world alight. In statements about the new appointment, Kering’s bosses sound bumptiously confident about its boldness. The group’s president, François-Henri Pinault, praised Gvasalia’s “unique approach to the profession, marked by a sociological observation of the wardrobe’s essentials,” while Balenciaga CEO Isabelle Guichot told Womenswear Daily they had chosen someone “capable of reshuffling the cards”.
Gvasalia will present his first collection for Balenciaga in Paris in March 2016.
Ralph Lauren is giving the fashion empire he founded almost five decades ago a makeover – by stepping down as chief executive.
He will hand control of the company, best known for its colourful polo shirts and preppy advertising campaigns, to a Gap executive in November.
Stefan Larsson has been running Old Navy, Gap’s budget brand, for the past three years.
Annual sales at Old Navy rose 8% last year and it overtook Gap to become the company’s biggest business with sales of $6.6bn - just over 40% of the company’s total.
Before joining Gap, Larsson worked for Sweden’s H&M for 15 years, during a period of rapid global expansion.
Describing Larsson as “exceptionally talented”, Lauren said the new boss would bring a fresh perspective: “Stefan and I have a strong personal bond and share a vision for the future of Ralph Lauren. I appreciate Stefan’s unique sensibility, his honesty and his authenticity.”
Larsson said the company had “tremendous potential” to continue expanding globally as it sought to appeal to a broader range of consumers.
However, Lauren is not going too far: he will remain with the company as executive chairman and chief creative officer.
Chief operating officer Jackwyn Nemerov will also depart in November and become an adviser.
The reshuffle follows a near-40% slide in Ralph Lauren shares over the past year to $104.12, leaving the company worth $9.2bn (£6bn).
Net profit for the 12 months to March also fell $74m to $702m, despite a $170m rise in net sales to $7.45bn.
In a bid to increase sales, Ralph Lauren has added three new brands, including Polo for Women and Polo Sport, as well as expanded both its luxury business and online operations.
The company owns 466 stores, including the Club Monaco brand and Polo factory outlets, as well as 536 department store concessions. 
Born Ralph Lifshitz to Jewish immigrants from Belarus in the Bronx in 1939, Lauren changed his last name at the age of 16.
He began his fashion career designing ties in 1967, with the Ralph Lauren polo shirt bearing the familiar logo following five years later.
Lauren was responsible for the wardrobe in the 1974 film version of The Great Gatsby, dressing Robert Redford in a pink suit.
Since the 1980s, the company’s advertising campaigns have portrayed a stylish, well-bred and wealthy version of American life that has found favour with aspirational consumers in the US and beyond.
Born in Wales, Grace Coddington, 74, won a modelling competition at 18 and moved to London. In 1968, she became junior fashion editor at Vogue. In 1988, she joined US Vogue, where she remains creative director. She lives in New York and the Hamptons with her partner, hairstylist Didier Malige. Her new book, Grace: Thirty Years Of Fashion At Vogue, is published by Phaidon this week.
What is your greatest fear? 
Having people over for dinner.
What is your earliest memory?
The first time I saw snow, when I was five. I was incredibly excited and crept out with my sister in our nightdresses and bare feet. I got sick the next day and was in trouble.
Which living person do you most admire?
All the people I work with, people like Anna Wintour and Bruce Weber.
What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?
I am a bit of a coward and easily panicked, which annoys me.
What is the trait you most deplore in others?
Loudness and pushiness.
What was your most embarrassing moment?
I went to photograph Prince Charles with Norman Parkinson – we did his official portrait for his investiture as the Prince of Wales. I completely panicked and was struck dumb.
Property aside, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? 
Probably a photograph.
What is your most treasured possession?
A scrapbook made for me by Bruce Weber when we did a shoot in the early 80s inspired by Edward Weston.
What or who is the greatest love of your life?
Certainly all my cats.
What makes you unhappy?
I get a huge amount of junk mail from animal charities, because I send them money. The tragic photographs and stories make me very sad.
What do you most dislike about your appearance?
My hump. I stoop and don’t have a nice straight back.
Who would play you in the film of your life?
I am trying to put together a movie based on my memoir. Julianne Moore would be good, and her daughter could play me as a young woman.
What is your most unappealing habit?
I am methodically slow, which drives some people crazy.
What did you want to be when you were growing up? 
A rock star, but I am tone deaf and really shy, so it was a fantasy.
Is it better to give or to receive?
I want to say it’s better to give, but I have trouble deciding what to give, so that becomes a stress.
What do you owe your parents?
They taught me discipline.
What was the best kiss of your life?
My first kiss when I was 14, with a boy who was staying in the hotel my parents ran. My knees went wobbly and he had to grab me before I fell.
What is the worst job you’ve done?
I was a really bad au pair. I don’t think I’m very good with children.
What is the closest you’ve come to death?
I was in a crash in London in the 1960s. My boyfriend drove through a red light and crashed into a van. My head struck the driving mirror. I had a lot of surgery.
What has been your biggest disappointment?
That one doesn’t stay agile all your life.
 More proof that accessories are crucial to this rebooted Gucci look. They are affordable, too, and so are expected to be commercial gold for the brand.
In October 2000 the Guggenheim Museum in New York opened a major retrospective of the work of Giorgio Armani. The previous year Armani had become a benefactor of the museum, with an amount rumoured to be $15m. The museum denied that the exhibition of about 400 Armani garments was a result of the designer’s generous “gift”, but the exhibition, which went on tour to the Guggenheim in Bilbao as well as the Royal Academy in London, sparked some cynicism.
Fifteen years later, single-brand exhibitions have become commonplace. Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty, which was created with the cooperation of the fashion house itself, in partnership with Swarovski and supported by American Express, was the V&A’s blockbuster hit this year, with more than 493,000 visitors. While there was collaboration with the brand, the show was rigorously curated (and any excess sponsorship money was sucked up by the elaborate staging).
In July a major retrospective of the work of Yves Saint Laurent opened at the elegant Bowes Museum in Barnard Castle, County Durham. Yves Saint Laurent: Style is Eternal runs until 25 October – and is well worth a visit. It was curated by the museum’s fashion and textiles curator Joanna Hashagen in close collaboration with the Pierre Bergé-Yves Saint Laurent Foundation in Paris (although she made sure that the YSL pieces were put into context with clothes from the museum’s own collection) and is already the most popular exhibition in the museum’s 123-year history.
Other brand exhibitions this autumn include Life on Foot at the Design Museum, taken from the Spanish footwear brand Camper’s Mallorcan archives (until 1 November). And next month Liberty in Fashion opens at the Fashion and Textile Museum in Bermondsey as part of the department store’s 140th anniversary celebrations (9 October to 28 February 2016).
According to Nina Due, head of exhibitions at the Design Museum, where the 2014 Christian Louboutin show was the museum’s most visited exhibition (with Hussein Chalayan and Paul Smith close runners-up), the appeal is because “the exclusivity of these brands means they are not accessible to people on the street”. An exhibition opens up their world in a very democratic way, with recreations of designers’ creative spaces, sketches, and an explanation of the processes used.
But there is also a rise in a new breed of what might be described as vanity exhibitions, where the brands can market themselves through Instagram and other social media. Fashion houses are no longer waiting for the honour of being invited to be the subject of an exhibition. They are bypassing the grand cultural institutions and doing it for themselves. “There is an influx of brands putting together shows about themselves and partnering with cultural organisations,” says Due. “The context is everything. We are the gatekeepers of the content.”
When the Design Museum exhibits brand shows, she insists, they curate them to make a culturally relevant show. The difference with exhibitions controlled by the brand itself is, Due says, that it simply becomes a form of advertorial.
Last April, Hermès Wanderland was an exhibition opening up the world of the French luxury brand to the public with 4,000 objects from their archives at the Saatchi Gallery in London. And this autumn it’s Chanel’s turn. The gallery will host three floors of Mademoiselle Privé, which will be a “journey through the origins of Chanel’s creations”, including a rare chance to see Karl Lagerfeld’s current Chanel haute couture collection up close. The exhibition will be free and run from 13 October to 1 November (mademoiselleprive.chanel.com).
And tonight, in the middle of London Fashion Week, Louis Vuitton Series 3 opens at 180 The Strand, a disused 60s office building a short walk from Somerset House. According to the organisers, it will be “an experiential fashion exhibition” which will take the viewer on a series of interlocking journeys through the creative processes of the luxury fashion house, and the world view of designer Nicolas Ghesquière, arguably one of the fashion world’s most influential designers.
The show – designed in collaboration with Es Devlin, the stage designer responsible for the 2012 London Olympics closing ceremony who is also working on the opening ceremony of the Brazil Olympics 2016 – promises to be a total immersion inside Louis Vuitton’s A/W15 collection. With geodesic domes and giant 3D logos made from LED particles it does sound quite intriguing. An “infinite show” features 48 LED screens with all the models from the A/W15 catwalk trapped in perpetual motion. The Walk-in Wardrobe room will have plexiglass boxes you can pull out allowing you to “interact” with the clothes – surely a poor substitute for simply going to the shop on Bond Street, where you can even try them on if you fancy – but the stickers that you can take away at the end of the show means you can, almost, own your own piece of Vuitton for free. All they ask for in return is that you share your experience on social media.
If you don’t make it to the Strand, check out #LVseries3 from 7pm this evening, when the private view opens. Even if you didn’t get an invitation to the party, you will almost feel as though you are there.
Because I got invited to a show and I wanted to share that with you.
Because I am being driven in a car to a show and I suspect you’re still on the 55 bus.
Because all these models are making me feel fat and non-inclusive.
Not to be mistaken with #OCD (to be fully mistaken with #OCD)
Because I didn’t pay for most of this.
Because I’ve been to seven shows, I’m tired and I’ve lost perspective on what’s funny.
Because I’m starting to bore myself with catwalk shots.
There was no food, backstage.
Because I sat relatively close to Anna Wintour.
Because it’s day five and frankly, it’s all I’ve got left.
It’s been accused of being smug, sneered at for selling “anti-fashion” and even described as a “middle-class cult” – despite only opening a single shop – but now the clothing brand Boden could be coming to a high street near you. The mail-order clothes firm is following in the footsteps of brands such as the White Company and the Cambridge Satchel Company by moving from the web to physical stores. A spokeswoman this week said the brand is planning to open a string of shops in the UK and US for its 1.6 million active customers, after the success of its first permanent outlet in Hanger Green, west London.
Since it launched in 1991, Boden has been adored and scoffed at in equal – if surprisingly intense – measure. Fashion writers soon realised that the cheerful, if not cheap, clothes were being snapped up by time-poor consumers who wanted to avoid going into stores – and anything that looked too fashionable. One journalist pinpointed the appeal of Boden as not having to go to “scary shops staffed by skinny teenagers to buy any of it”.
Fans of its catalogue and later website loved the sun-drenched images it presented – often of rosy-cheeked children running through sand dunes or hills – so much, there were even Mumsnet discussions about where the capital of Boden-land would be (Padstow or St Albans, apparently). David Cameron and Boris Johnson were pictured wearing the company’s swimming trunks, instantly sparking a new stereotype, Boden man. Then in 2012 came a backlash against the “Boden brigade” as the “velvet-trimmed, braying, living embodiment of Middle England”. Yet the company, founded by former Bullingdon club member Johnnie Boden, kept expanding, moving online and breaking into the French and US markets.
So, when other fashion stores are scrambling to improve their websites, will the move to physical stores put off Boden’s loyal consumers? Richard Perks, director of retail research at market analysts Mintel, says that, while it is not a move many fashion sites are making, it still “makes a hell of a lot of sense”.
“Stores are great marketing. If you have a shop, people pass it every day,” he says. “To me, the whole multichannel way of selling is the right way forward – it lets your customers buy from you in the way that suits them best.” Which, in a sense, has always been the secret of the brand’s success.
If anyone knows how to win in the fashion industry, it’s Ms Alexa Chung. Her new short film on how to break into the industry on vogue.co.uk is required viewing for anyone aiming to be on that front row in future seasons. Here the queen of London fashion week spills about the Topshop trousers she loves right now, partying with the Delevingnes and, um, ducks v dogs.
JCM: In your Vogue video series, you talk to everyone in the industry from designers to psychologists. If you could do anyone’s job in the fashion industry for one day, which one would you pick and why?
AC: I’ve always wanted to be a photographer. Or I’d like to be [Balmain designer] Olivier Rousteing – he looks as though he’s just been handed the keys to the city.
JCM: And if you could be a fly on the wall in one designer’s studio, which would you pick?
AC: Nicholas Ghesquiere – I’m such a huge fan. And I have become recently obsessed with Vetements. I have no idea who designs that or where they’re based, so that would be fun to discover. 
JCM: Fashion is seen as a tricky industry for outsiders to get into. Is this true, and what strategies are helpful for breaking through?
AC: That’s something we talk a lot about in this series. It’s true that it takes a lot of determination and hard work to break into the industry, but I think if you’re passionate about what you do and are talented and willing to carry out the more mundane tasks while learning your trade it is achievable. 
JCM: Is it better to be on-trend or to have a signature style?
AC: Yikes, I don’t know that there’s a right way to dress. People get bored and crave the opposite – that’s what fashion is about, I suppose; the desire to create something new and move forward so if you just stick to how you feel the chances are you’ll probably collide with a few trends along the way.
JCM: In the Vogue video, I noticed an awesome multi-coloured pastel manicure. Are rainbow nails a thing now?
AC: Really? I can’t remember it ... oh! I know – no, that was because I went to get a pedicure but I have a horribly low attention span so as I was waiting for that, I painted my hands every colour they had. I got tired of looking at it really quickly but was too lazy to locate nail varnish remover for a while.
JCM: Have you got any top tips for interviewing Olivier Rousteing without licking his face?
AC: Hahahaha. It’s funny with him because his Instagram persona is so different to how I find him to be. He’s chronically intelligent and kind and really funny. Doesn’t take himself too seriously at all.
JCM: What’s the best career advice anyone’s ever given you?
AC: Phillip Lim just said this to me this morning in relation to people, but I suppose it works for business too: “A duck quacks, a dog barks. Never expect a duck to bark.” No idea what he’s going on about, but it sounds good!
JCM: And the best non-career advice?
AC: Someone once said: never get into something if you’re already thinking about how to get out. My advice to people is to trust their intuition. And be kind, just be kind.
JCM: Who are your top three favourite Instagram accounts to follow and why?
AC: I really like @manrepeller, she’s cool and funny. @zanzanman is great to oggle and @laurabaileylondon is nice for some dream-life escapism.
JCM: If you had to have a job outside the fashion industry, what would it be?
JCM: Describe your front row look for this season as if she was a character in a story.
JCM: What’s the one piece I can buy on the high street right now for instant AW15 chic?
AC: Red high-waisted cord trousers from Topshop [alas, they’re currently sold out].
AC: Weather is too easy. Sometimes I like to turn to the person next to me and just say: “Are you in love?” People like talking about love or heartbreak. Another good one is: “Do you have lots more to do today?” As if sitting front row is understood to be the most exhausting, challenging job in the world. 
JCM: Can you or any of your friends do good impersonations of any top model’s signature walks? Details, please.
AC: Dude, yes. We play catwalks all the time. Never thought I’d make it to my thirties and still be playing catwalk. I like to be Naomi. 
JCM: Chair-dancing on the front row: yes or no?
AC: I understand that to observe it must be irksome to observe, but the House of Holland show makes me so happy and the music is always too good to resist.
JCM: What’s your favourite song lyric of all time?
AC: Impossible to answer, but today I’ll settle for this by Elvis Costello:
JCM: Who is your favourite party wingman for a night out at fashion week, and why?
AC: Poppy Delevingne. Never a dull moment when she’s around. 
A Bangladesh court has ordered two garment factory owners and 11 others to stand trial for the deaths of 111 workers in the country’s worst industrial fire.
Delwar Hossain and his wife, Mahmuda Akter, were formally charged over the 2012 blaze, which tore through the Tazreen factory on Dhaka’s outskirts, trapping workers who made clothes for western retailers.
“The court charged the 13 including Delwar and his wife with causing death by negligence,” the prosecutor Khandakar Abdul Mannan said outside the district court in Dhaka.
“The judge ordered a trial from 1 October when witness testimonies will be recorded,” he said.
The November 2012 fire shone an international spotlight on appalling conditions in Bangladesh’s $25bn (£16.4bn) garment industry.
The blaze was followed by an even bigger tragedy less than 12 months later, when the nine-storey Rana Plaza garment complex collapsed, killing 1,138 people.
Mannan said the 13 charged over the blaze, who also include factory managers and security guards, face a maximum of 10 years in jail if convicted.
Eight of those charged, including the owners, were present in court on Thursday, but the five others were still on the run, he said.
Deadly accidents are common in Bangladesh’s 4,500 garment factories, which are a mainstay of the impoverished country’s economy. Factory owners, however, rarely face charges.
Tazreen, in the Ashulia industrial district, supplied clothes to international brands including Walmart, C&A and Enyce, a label owned by the US rapper Sean “Diddy” Combs.
Hossain, the factory’s managing director, and Akter, its chair, were accused of breaching building regulations, including unsafe stairwells, in the nine-storey complex.
The pair have pleaded not guilty. Their lawyer could not be contacted for comment.
Kalpona Akter, the executive director of the Bangladesh Centre for Worker Solidarity, welcomed the trial, saying it would send “a clear message to errant entrepreneurs who overlook safety issues in their factories”.
“It’s possibly the first time that the owners of a garment plant are being tried for their roles in the deaths of workers in a factory fire,” she said.
“Unfortunately the government’s factory inspectors, who had a huge role in the tragedy, were not indicted for the crime.”
State inspectors, whose role is to ensure factory safety, avoided charges despite accusations by worker rights groups that they allowed the owners to operate without regular monitoring.
Victims of the fire, mostly women who were paid as little as $37 (£24) a month, were overcome by smoke. The factory gates were locked and they were forced to jump from windows on upper floors, police said.
Some managers and security guards insisted that workers return to their duties even though smoke was billowing from the ground floor where the fire started, according to a police report.
The Rana Plaza collapse in April 2013 and other disasters prompted sweeping reforms, including new safety inspections and higher wages in the industry, which employs around 4 million people.
8) London College of Fashion, University of the Arts London, UK 
 Often known as LCF, the London College of Fashion, is the fourth most influential school in the ranking. It has the second highest enrolment rate, at 98%, and the third highest international enrolment rate, at 44%. It has an excellent library and resources, according to a student who commented in the survey. The student satisfaction rate for the quality of its recruiters and its alumni network are low, however. LCF comes even higher in the BoF’s master’s-level rankings, at number four
The BA press fashion show at Central Saint Martins (CSM) attracts leading fashion journalists, buyers and employers, and this year’s glittering event was no exception. In the glamorous atrium of the art college, now part of the University of the Arts London, models showed the work of 40 undergraduate students. But as guests left the show, they were met with a silent demonstration by almost 100 other students whose collections had not been chosen for the catwalk. “They were standing in silence, modelling their own designs or they had got friends to do it. There was amazing talent there and when you think how much they had spent on course fees and on their collections you can understand why they were so disappointed not to get shown,” says Sarah Mower, fashion journalist and ambassador for emerging talent at the British Fashion Council. It can cost students £10,000 to prepare an MA collection, she says.
“I think the problem comes from the college accepting too many people on the course,” says graduate Dilara Findikoglu, who came up with the idea for the demonstration. “There used to be 20 to 40 and now it’s 120. Throughout the year everyone works really hard and puts equal love and effort into their collection and it is very upsetting not to see your name on the list.”
Despite this, according to a new global ranking of fashion schools, CSM is the best in the world. The ranking, produced by the Business of Fashion, a website for the creative industries, measures schools by global impact, learning experience and long-term value. The UK does exceptionally well, with CSM, which produced Stella McCartney, Sarah Burton and John Galliano, top for undergraduate programmes. The Royal College of Art, where alumni include Christopher Bailey, Holly Fulton and Erdem, is best in the world for graduate courses. Meanwhile, Kingston University, London, is rated third for its undergraduate fashion courses and the London College of Fashion fourth for graduate programmes.
But an accompanying survey of more than 4,000 fashion students and recent graduates uncovers simmering discontent – particularly about how well fashion schools prepare students for employment. CSM was well ahead in the undergraduate table for global influence, but has a long way to go when it comes to learning experience and long-term value, says Imran Amed, founder of Business of Fashion. “Saint Martins is not alone; students from most schools wanted greater exposure to employers and more preparedness for working in the industry.”
A recent CSM graduate commented in the survey: “It’s one of the most prestigious schools in the world when it comes to fashion and just that in itself opened a lot of doors for me. There is a lot of controversy around the training at CSM, though – like the fact that we didn’t have one single technical class or business course throughout our BA. If you want to have that, you are told, you can go somewhere else.”
Another respondent said: “Brilliant school, brilliant exposure, zero help afterwards. Based on your own intuitions to get a job, no agencies or industry links provided.”
University for the Creative Arts Epsom was fourth highest for student satisfaction with the quality of the lecturers, but there were complaints about finding work afterwards. “Career paths were not adequately explained,” said one graduate.
Over the past two decades, fashion has become one of the most competitive courses at university, with at least six applications for each place at the top schools. But there is no guarantee of a job at the end, says Alex Brownless, a fashion designer who co-founded the Arts Thread network to help creative people launch their brands and gain employment. “The top schools have long lists of alumni designers, but when you look closely you find half their graduates are not working at all or not working in the industry. I know a major London institution where a shop assistant in Top Shop, Oxford Circus, qualifies as a job in fashion. Students rack up huge debts and struggle to pay for materials and think there will be a job at the end because their course has an 89% employment rate, and they end up in Kentucky Fried Chicken. It’s incredibly cruel.”
Brownless thinks universities should publish detailed statistics on how many of their fashion students are employed and what they’re doing a year after graduating. But Mower says this is not the only problem with fashion schools: while the number of fashion courses has increased, they don’t necessarily cover the skills needed for the industry. “A huge skills gap is opening up – pattern cutting has gone by the board in many colleges, while the design houses are crying out for skilled pattern cutters and pay good money. People come out having designed a collection but it is the technician who has sewn it,” she says.
Joshua Kane, one of Russell Brand’s favourite designers, is a bespoke tailor and also worries that skills are being lost. He took extra classes to work on his cutting and sewing techniques. But he disagrees with the claim that fashion schools don’t give students enough help. “I would say we had plenty of exposure to the industry. In the end, it comes down to the work ethic of the individual students and how hard they fight to make themselves more employable. Some of those I meet today don’t have it,” says Kane, who graduated from Kingston University in 2007.
Ayako Furness, a womenswear textile designer at Burberry, who moved from Japan to study at CSM, agrees. “I was surprised at how much students are expected to learn by themselves in the UK and they didn’t teach much technical-wise but I disagree with people who say they don’t help you find work. CSM helped me to get internships and then my first job with Louis Vuitton.”
Fashion design courses are not there to teach business and enterprise, says Elinor Renfrew, BA (Hons) fashion course director at Kingston University. “Our students work on real briefs with real companies and we make as many links with employers as we can. That’s how they learn about the industry.”
Willie Walters, course director of BA (Hons) fashion at CSM, says the press show is just one of the many things CSM does to link students with employers, and disagrees that it can be unfair. “Students know from the outset that they will not all be able to show their work there. We hold assessment shows two weeks before the press event, where all students show their work. This takes a full day. There is also an exhibition in June where they show their full portfolios, attended by press and potential employers.”
But she is proud of the independent spirit of students who launched their own fashion show. “I don’t mind young people rebelling, that is what they should be doing.”
She’s not going to tell them to rebel again next year though. “That would be like having your mum say ‘that’s nice darling’.”
1 Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design, UK
2 Bunka Fashion College, Japan
3 Kingston University, UK
4 Parsons the New School for Design, US
5 Fashion Institute of Technology, US
6 Polimoda, Italy
7 University of Westminster, UK
8 London College of Fashion, UK
9 Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Australia
10 Drexel university, US
11 Shenkar College of Engineering, Design and Art, Israel
12 Ryerson University School of Fashion, Canada
13 Stephens College, US
14 Nottingham Trent University, UK
15 Savannah College of Art and Design, US
16 Philadelphia University, US
17 University for the Creative Arts – Epsom, UK
18 Istituto Marangoni, Italy
19 Beijing Institute of Fashion Technology, China
20 Hogeschool Van Amsterdam, Netherlands
1 Royal College of Art, UK
2 Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design, UK
3 Royal Academy of Fine Arts, Belgium
4 London College of Fashion, UK
5 Savannah College of Art and Design, US
6 Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology, Australia
7 Institut Français de la Mode, France
8 Ryerson University School of Fashion, Canada
9 Polimoda, Italy
10 Philadelphia University, US
When my father, Giuseppe Alessi, who has died aged 82, arrived in Accrington, Lancashire, from Sicily in 1961, he had already been in tailoring since the age of 10, making his own suits by the age of 18.
As with many people from southern Italy and Sicily, postwar poverty played a large part in the decision to emigrate. Born one of six children to Giuseppe Sr and Calogera Maria (nee Falcone) in Racalmuto, out of economic necessity he had left school early to take up an apprenticeship, arranged by his father, with a local tailor. Many people in Racalmuto had left for Accrington, and so eventually, in his late 20s, he headed there.
As a migrant my father was not demonised but welcomed with open arms by the people of the town. My mother, Angela, a seamstress he had met at church in Racalmuto, followed him two years later and they were married in 1963. Both worked in various cotton mills in the area until my father acquired a position with a tailor in Rawtenstall. Having then saved enough money, Giuseppe and Angela managed to buy the corner shop next to their home.
Giuseppe’s reputation grew over the years, and word spread across the county that a Sicilian tailor was making suits wholly on the premises, and entirely by hand, in a small shop in Accrington. Often there would be customers’ Rolls-Royces, Ferraris and Bentleys parked outside, usually surrounded by excited local children and more than a few admiring adults. Every year Giuseppe would close the shop for six weeks, having left a small, often misspelled handwritten notice in the shop window – “On oliday till Septembe. Tank-you” – and take his family back home to Sicily to spend the summer there.
Among his many customers over the years were the world snooker champions Dennis Taylor and Alex Higgins, and the footballer David Dunn. The suit that Taylor wore when he beat Steve Davis in the notable 1985 world snooker championship final was made by my father.
After he retired in 2004 Giuseppe led a simple life, converting one of the rooms in his cellar into a small workshop and making suits for friends and family. He liked to watch Italian television via satellite, and, much to my mother’s chagrin, enjoyed cooking: they were like cat and dog in the kitchen.
He was a well-known and well-loved character in Accrington and could often be found bulk-buying food in the town centre; the cellar resembled a nuclear bunker, its shelves filled to the ceiling with tinned tomatoes and extra virgin olive oil. His love of Italian and Sicilian food – and especially meat and potato pies – never diminished. He had a kind word and a joke for everyone – in his own inimitable Italian/Lancashire accent.
He is survived by Angela; by a brother, Pietro; by his children, me, Marco and Adriana; and by three grandchildren, Bert, Simon and Abbie.
The average bra size in Britain is 36D. That’s not small – 36D is a lifetime of painful stair-running and unavoidable cleavage away from the aspirins-on-an-ironing-board chests many catwalk models have. But it’s not huge, either.
The word “average” is generally synonymous with “normal”, which makes it interesting when brands such as Reformation start designing clothes with “larger busts” in mind, for the many of us with anything larger than a pair of apricots up top who sometimes find shopping a pain.
Obviously, this is a great thing. But Reformation’s “larger busts” are between a C cup and a DD cup. To me (a 34D) – and some of you, judging by the comments – a DD doesn’t exactly scream “larger”. It says, at most, “a bit bigger”. GG is large. But, the advent of a fashion company that begins at a C cup tells us a lot about how fashion treats tits generally.
In fashion, being anything above a C cup is novel. Model-wise, Lara Stone, Kate Upton and Gisele “the boobs from Brazil” Bündchen’s bouncy décolletés make them anomalies. And despite there being signs of change throughout the industry, namely in Victoria’s Secrets’ employment of Doutzen Kroes, Miranda Kerr and Adriana Lima in their “Angels” cast, they didn’t hire Upton for it, saying she was “too obvious”. That she has the biggest of them all seemed significant.
Broadly speaking, boobs and fashion are like oil and water: with enough shaking up, they’ll blend for a minute, but naturally they repel. Because breasts are difficult to dress, apparently. During couture week in 2013, Jourdan Dunn was left out of the Dior show because of her size. “Ahahahahahaha I just got cancelled from Dior because of my boobs!” she said on Twitter, before adding that she was “normally told I’m cancelled because I’m ‘coloured’, so being cancelled because of my boobs is a minor”, before ending with a smiley face that possibly speaks of massive frustration.
Speaking from experience, as a non-model, it can be difficult to dress and shop if you are bigger than a C cup. In fact, I’ve struggled in almost every high-street store to find tops that flatter my size – usually somewhere around a 12, depending on the store – and what I have in my bra. This isn’t something I’ve really talked to anyone about, either, and I’m not sure why. It feels like breasts are a subject often left out of body-image discussions, especially when it comes to clothes. I wonder if this is because we’re worried about cup size being equated with weight.
I have a friend with very large breasts and an astounding, 5ft 8in athletic body. She often has to buy size 16 or 18 women’s tops to fit them in properly without being constricted and cleavagey. For this reason, she only ever shops alone, and told me that she had never owed a designer item of clothing, because nothing she had tried on had fitted properly. What a shame that, because of the way most high-street stores have designed their womenswear – the result of filtering catwalk looks into something wearable – she ends up having to buy three sizes bigger than she actually is.
It would be easy to say, “Oh, why does it matter, it’s only a label,” but labels matter to a lot of women. They matter to me, whether I enjoy admitting it or not. I don’t want to buy a nice top in a size 16 just because my boobs won’t fit the 10 or 12.
Unless I stick to my uniform of slouchy, crew-neck T-shirts (often from Topman, rather than Topshop), it can be hard to avoid them looking … weird. Anything with a high neck makes me look boxy and uncomfortable, and squashes them down in a way that makes the nipples go really close together – not great when it’s cold and you don’t like padded bras. If you’re someone who likes their bras on the lacy, plunging side, though, a high-necked top can give you a four-boob appearance, with a highly visible, panna cotta-like jiggle up there when you walk around.
Generally speaking, women’s tops seem to be either high-necked or plunging, which just makes me feel shut out. That’s why I like men’s T-shirts from Gap, Cos and Uniqlo – they’re loose in the right places and don’t cling to the bits of back flesh that are gently separated by my bra. I don’t want my back to look like a shar pei’s face, but I don’t want to drown in something that masks my figure and femininity entirely. It’s tricky.
Designer-wise, I’m not really a dress person, so I’ve never gone down the Vivienne Westwood route (apart from splashing out on the notorious tits T-shirt, actually), although she’s known for designing with a curvier female shape in mind and is a stalwart for many women I know. When I have the money and fancy introducing something other than a white T-shirt or stripy breton into my wardrobe (last count: 21), I veer towards the more drapey, less gender-specific clothes of Margaret Howell, Acne and Comme des Garçons’ Play collections, because I don’t like tight stuff. Not being fond of having a cleavage can be a real issue if you’re an ample-busted woman buying designer wares – particularly dresses. I wish I had the confidence to absolutely smash it in the way Amy Schumer did at a premiere of Trainwreck, her chest a palace of luxury, but I don’t. Probably because my boobs have always made me feel intimidated whenever I’ve been able to afford a smart designer thing.
It’s hard to see how the situation will change when sample sizes are still the axis on which the fashion industry spins. Fashion designers still – despite the negative press, the inquiries and the genuine enthusiasm of some editors for doing their bit to try and instigate change – design for miniature, thin-hipped, tiny-busted girls with child-like bodies, because they believe the clothes hang better on them. It’s sample sizes that are loaned out for fashion shoots and, while designers might make exceptions and make something bespoke (see Kim Kardashian’s custom Prada on the cover of Love magazine), if a model struggles to wear sample size well because of her boobs, chances are she won’t be used. Jamie Ellis, a model manager at the agency IMG (which represents Upton, Stone and Bündchen), told Vogue last year that he had been seeing “designers more willing to change samples to fit a special girl” – but the emphasis there is on “special”. Being an exception to the rule.
I might feel a million miles away from the world of sample sizes, but I’m not. That’s where the entire fashion cycle begins, and sample sizes just don’t accommodate big(ger) boobs. We don’t need to get too The-Devil-Wears-Prada-blue-sweater-monologue about it, but Gucci’s original design and cut of something, say, is what will percolate through to Topshop’s floor. That is the blueprint, and it ignores things like a 36D average bra size.
So, while it’s great that companies are popping up to cater to the larger-breasted woman, perhaps it’s worth considering that a) the vast majority of bras go up to a DD anyway and b) not every woman wants to buy from a “plus-size” collection – even if that “plus” only relates to their boobs. These collections may claim to be affordable, too, but their limited production lines make them unaffordable for some people. Most women just want to shop and find things within their budget that look nice and fit well. If only it were that simple.
• Fashion for ‘women with larger breasts’: the article that caused the ruckus
Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen famously shared the role of Michelle Tanner on ABC sitcom Full House because of strict Hollywood child labor laws.
So when they hired interns for their Dualstar Entertainment Group production company, they may well have assumed every self-respecting young professional starting out in their career had a twin or doppelganger of some kind with whom to share her workload.
That might explain why approximately 40 current and former interns have filed a class-action lawsuit in Manhattan supreme court alleging exploitative conditions, including 50-hour workweeks, without pay or academic credit.
“I was doing the work of three interns,” said Shahista Lalani, the lead plaintiff in the suit and a former design intern at the Row, the Olsens’ fashion label.
If the Olsens had indeed assumed Lalani was a set of triplets, splitting the work between herself and two siblings, this would have left each intern with a much more agreeable 16.6-hour work schedule.
As the Olsens may realise as the case progresses, office life can be difficult for those without a twin to share the burden of data entry and fetching a superior’s asparagus water.
Of course, if Dualstar was aware of the disgruntled interns’ alleged mistreatment and lack of twin siblings, it would fit into an established pattern of so-called “glamour industries” relying on uncompensated and under-compensated labor, which largely restricts the industries’ talent pool to the privileged and blocks applicants already saddled with student loan debt from applying ... twin problems.
A studio complex in Hackney, which houses London Fashion Week designers Lou Dalton, Jonathan Saunders and James Long, is set to close. The Trampery, on Hackney’s Mare Street, has been hit by a 400% rent increase, from £125,000 per annum to £500,000 from September. This coincides with London fashion week, and one of the busiest periods in any designer’s schedule.
The Trampery London Fields was opened in 2013 as a workspace open to more than 30 fashion businesses including app developers and photography agents, studios for designers and a 2,500 sq ft showspace. Working with the British Fashion Council and the London College of Fashion, founder Charles Armstrong developed a model where different sides of the industry could mix, in a way that replicated the communal workspaces common in the tech industry (the Trampery also run similar spaces for tech and travel industries across east London). With 24-hour access to studios, Wi-Fi and affordable rent, it quickly became “a community,” says Long, where members benefited from being together. “If a buyer came to visit, they would meet all of the designers.” Caroline Rush, the CEO of the British Fashion Council, has called an “ideal place to develop a designer business.” There is now a campaign to find a new venue where that can exist.
With rents increasing in London by more than 3% in the last year, this is part of a wider trend, with these designers the latest casualties. Jamie Craven, Communications Manager at The Trampery, says the demand from designers has been huge since it opened two years ago, “suggesting there is a severe lack of space, and it’s only getting harder to find it”. He describes the closure as “tragic” but says it’s down to an acceleration of aggressive property development that Londoners are familiar with, now “at an insane rate that we can’t compete with”. Although it’s unclear what the Trampery’s building will now be used for, there is thought to be a tenant ready to move in.
Most London fashion week designers are based in the east of the city and, arguably, addresses in Dalston and Hackney already suggest they are being “pushed” out as rents increase in more central areas. In the 90s, Shoreditch was the home of young fashion labels in London but spaces there are no longer affordable. Hackney is now the favoured location for start-up fashion brands with, according to Armstrong, around 2000 designers in the area. The closure of the Trampery suggests they may soon be moved out still further. Long has relocated to Hackney Wick, where there are numerous warehouse buildings housing designers and artists. “I’ve been in London for 12 years, and seem to be moving further and further out,” he says. “These areas are going to be very soulless when all the young creatives have gone.”
A typical Apfel outfit comprises clanging armfuls of bracelets and multiple layers of colourful, chunky beads. Her trademark, though, is a pair of oversized, owlish spectacles, which are so bold that they add to the overall impression that even her weirdest fashion choices are unquestionably stylish and deliberate. Which, of course, they are. For Apfel, this talent in the blood: “My mother worshipped at the altar of the accessory,” she says. “She could do things with a scarf that I have never seen anyone do.”
Judging by the bold colours and mindbending patterns of much of Apfel’s wardrobe, you might not expect her to describe herself as a “denim freak”. In fact, the film reveals that some of her coolest ensembles centre around oversized denim shirts, the perfect laid-back counterpoint to all that clanging jewellery. The shirts embroidered with cartoon cows and Mickey Mouse as a cowboy are particularly fetching.
Apfel’s house is complete loopy, full of Christmas decorations and children’s toys arranged into unusual tableaux – such as a Kermit puppet riding a life-sized plastic ostrich. Apfel’s husband, Carl, who celebrates his 100th birthday in the film, fully backs Apfel in her eccentricities and has a strong spectacles game (small, round, tortoiseshell) himself.
“She looks very Voguey” ... “the cat’s pyjamas” ... “going gangbusters”. While much of the fashion industry ends up stuck using just a handful of phrases (“obsessed” and “amazing” figure highly), Apfel is full of wonderfully idiosyncratic expressions.
Apfel describes being told, by a shop manager, that she is “not pretty and will never be pretty”, and she confirms she that doesn’t believe herself to be so – and doesn’t care. “I’m not a pretty person. I don’t like pretty – so I don’t feel badly ... Most of the world is not with me, but I don’t care.”
Apfel describes the hours tracking down pieces of jewellery and haggling with shop owners over fabric: “It’s hard work; you really have to put a lot of effort into it. Everything I have, I go out and find.” And if you don’t fancy all of that faff? She says she would never judge another person’s outfit if they are happy that way. “It’s better to be happy than to be well dressed.”
It is an assignment that Kate Moss, who has appeared on the cover of British Vogue 36 times, described as “the best job ever”. Clive Arrowsmith, who has taken portraits of everyone from Michael Caine to the Dalai Lama, likened it to “a knighthood of photography”. Carine Roitfeld, the former editor of French Vogue, and Steven Meisel, who has shot all but one Italian Vogue cover in two decades, recently called their involvement with the title “an honour”. Karl Lagerfeld, who was commissioned to shoot his “dear friend” Julianne Moore as the Greek goddess Hera, commented that “nobody believes in these gods any more, but [these] girls ... are the goddesses of today”.
The publication to which these giants of modern style refer? A soft-porn calendar promoting tyres. The extent to which the Pirelli calendar has been embraced by the fashion industry has been unavoidable, in the wake of 50th-anniversary gala celebrations held in a modern art gallery in Milan and attended by top-flight models, photographers, stylists and designers, and the publication of a new coffee-table book celebrating the half century. The fashion industry, normally intensely snobbish about distancing itself from the fake-tanned, fake-boobed world of commercialised glamour modelling, has nonetheless taken the Pirelli calendar to its heart. (Or perhaps, more accurately, to its bosom.)
Pirelli’s triumph is a masterclass in image management, one that leverages basic instincts in a sophisticated marketplace. Its power lies in the fact that being acknowledged as sexually attractive is a valuable asset to women in the public eye, whereas being seen as sexually available is demeaning. So the deal Pirelli strikes with photographers and models is that they get to be sexy, and Pirelli gets to be classy. A key part of the Pirelli legend is that the calendar is not available to purchase, but sent to a secret list of high-rollers and international public figures. This exclusivity is now entirely academic – the images are widely published on the internet – but it sets a context no less powerful for being imaginary.
At its worst, the Pirelli calendar gives free rein to fashion’s ickiest side. The 2010 calendar, shot by Terry Richardson, is all squeakily waxed young women with Richardson’s signature pool-party slicked-back hair, eating bananas or pretending to lick cockerels. (Seriously.) But Pirelli has been very smart about playing up its illustrious roll call of photographers, from Helmut Newton to Annie Leibovitz, and about balancing the unreconstructed salaciousness of Richardson with artier issues.
Richardson’s calendar was followed by Karl Lagerfeld’s, which with its classical theme and inclusion of a man, and older women, served as a counterweight. Next, Pirelli commissioned Mario Sorrenti, who tempered his full-on nudity with a raft of artistic illusion. Lara Stone’s armpit-flashing, full-frontal pose nodded to Helmut Newton’s composition; a sun-dappled Kate Moss shot to the shadow-play of Fernand Fonssagrives’ beauty photography. In 2013, the photojournalist Steve McCurry – most famous for his portrait Afghan Girl, which appeared on the cover of National Geographic in 1985 – shot the calendar on the streets of Rio, with no nudity at all.
The standard account of modelling nude for Pirelli is unsettling in the way it conflates two very different experiences. The shoot is a high-budget affair, everyone on it is treated – and paid – royally. The female subjects will often describe the experience as “fun” and “empowering” – entirely understandable, when they are describing being cosseted in a luxury location in the company of prestigious photographers and stylists. But that quote about it being “fun” and “empowering” then gets attached to a photo of a woman without her clothes on, and so appears to suggest that simply getting your clothes off for the male gaze is fun and empowering. It’s a neat sleight of hand that sends a strange message to young women who will see the images and the quotes on the internet – which they will, because the calendar has become as much an integral part of the fashion cycle as the Oscars or Glastonbury.
But even if we would like to, it is impossible to dismiss the Pirelli calendar as an outmoded relic. The bald fact is that, if it was naff, it wouldn’t have worked. Its power derives in large part from its style. Unlike Page 3, which long ago fell out of step with current aspirational imagery – and therefore lost relevance – the Pirelli calendar, like it or not, is a reference point for where we as a society are at, in the ever-changing landscape of bodies, sex and desire. The theme for the 2015 calendar is fetish, which translates into a lot of black latex. The Fifty Shades influence seems straightforward – until you consider that the calendar was styled by Roitfeld, whose tenure at French Vogue brought fetishistic imagery back into the mainstream and, arguably, paved the way for the Fifty Shades era. Roitfeld’s calendar, then, serves as a document underlining her own influence. A photo of Joan Smalls in a boxing ring seems to reflect the way the discourse around bodies has changed, with exercise regimes now a central preoccupation.
Because it is shot by high-powered, well-connected creative teams, the calendar does not lag behind fashion in the way that most glamour photography does. On the contrary, this year’s vogue for older women starring in advertising campaigns – Julia Roberts and Donatella Versace for Givenchy, for instance – was perhaps presaged by the appearance of Sophia Loren, aged 72, in the 2007 calendar. The current obsession with bottoms rather than bosoms – see Kim Kardashian, or alternatively turn on commercial pop radio, where you will undoubtedly hear a song about bottoms within ten minutes, max – is reflected in the rise of bottom-emphasising shots. (In the most recent calendar, Ana Ewers on a bike, shot from somewhere around the middle of the back wheel.)
The bodies themselves are remarkably consistent over the years, which makes this year’s cover girl worth noting. Candice Huffine, who has previously been photographed nude by Meisel for Italian Vogue, is the first plus-size model to feature in a Pirelli calendar. The decision to accept the job was, says Huffine, who is a UK size 18, “a no-brainer ... and they put a whip in my hand. It was fun.”
Question: how do you relaunch a sneaker right now? Answer: without changing much at all. Converse have unveiled the Chuck Taylor All Star II to great fanfare this week but, at first glance, it’s barely changed. Anyone looking at the new design would be hard pushed to spot the differences, but they are there. The white rubber sole, metal eyelets for laces and all-important badge with that star are all there but they have had a bit of a scrub up. The eyelets are coloured in matt black, the patch comes with embroidered logo rather than printed and the rubber front is higher, extended up up to meet the laces. 
While they have been souped up with all sorts of technical changes – a Nike Lunalon sockline (Converse has been owned by Nike since 2003), a padded tongue and Tencel canvas to make it more durable – it will no doubt please devotees who wear them 24/7 that their beloved footwear’s look is very familiar.
This subtle approach pleases the converted but it might also put the All Star on the radar of new customers. It’s certainly very of the moment. Boring trainers – no disrespect to Chucks – are the thing. Rather than the bright chunky bubbly things that ruled a few years ago, now is all about styles we have known for ages: Stan Smiths, Reebok Classics and Nike Blazers, solid, dependable, easy to wear with lots of things, and with some sort of heritage. The All Star fits into that. First made nearly 100 years ago, and named in honour of contemporary basketball player Chuck Taylor in the 1930s, they have been worn by American soldiers in the first world war, along with icons of cool including James Dean, Kurt Cobain and the Ramones and, more recently, Wiz Khalifa and Kristen Stewart. Pretty good refs then – and all yours by wearing a canvas shoe.
Arguably, Converse has seen an opportunity here and pounced on it. After marketing campaigns that played up rock musicians’ penchant for the shoes – ad campaigns full of partying young people and the strapline “shoes are boring, wear sneakers” – this is going back to basics, but at a time when actually that seems quite edgy. The All Star is their classic and with the II they have rebooted it, just enough.
The man in the crocheted top and hooded tabard outside Skylight Studios in New York’s West Village is mournful. A fashion student at the Royal College of Art in London, he’s here to promote his SS16 collection guerrilla style by handing out fanzines displaying his wares to the assorted buyers, fashion press and hangers-on attending New York’s first ever men’s fashion week, largely held in the venue, a repurposed photographers’ studio. “Londoners are much more friendly – these people are tough,” he complains, as New York’s fashion industry marches purposefully into the industrial white hallway.
New York fashion week: men’s, to give it its full title, is above all a business opportunity. Next week is market week, when buyers come to check out the collections on the racks and decide which they’re going to select for their customers – boutiques, department stores and e-tailers like Matches fashion or Net-a-Porter’s menswear site, Mr Porter. Having a New York men’s fashion week now, three weeks after the fashion industry has attended the traditional menswear shows in Paris and Milan (preceded by LCM, the burgeoning menswear week in London) makes commercial sense: instead of merely perusing the clothes on the racks in the designers’ headquarters, as buyers have traditionally done, they can experience the designers’ visions in catwalk shows.
“Once you get guys on a runway and you have your special pieces and the music it comes more to life,” says hotly tipped designer Tim Coppens. “It just helps for buyers to look, like how does this piece look when it’s worn?”
Not that a lot of the big American designers have particularly pushed the boat out. Calvin Klein’s menswear presentation on Tuesday afternoon simply seems like an agreeable excuse for a mid-afternoon booze-up, with a menswear collection the fashion industry has already seen in Milan last month displayed on mannequins as the fash pack mill around, occasionally thumbing the luxe fabrics. “Is that champagne or prosecco?” demands a particularly accomplished freeloader of the waiters proffering booze. When hearing it’s champagne (of course), he plucks a glass off the tray and wades into the throng.
For younger designers though, NYFWM presents an opportunity. New York has never had a menswear week; usually the men’s shows are mixed in among the womenswear, where they often get overlooked in a fashion world where female consumers still overwhelmingly generate the big bucks. However, that’s changing – menswear sales are up every season, and even the New York Times has launched a men’s style section to soak up all that lovely advertising. For what one imagines are similar reasons, the former editor of Vogue Paris, Carine Roitfeld, will launch a menswear magazine next season called CR Men’s Book. The press release contains the crushing Carine edict, “I hate to see socks. They are never sexy.”
This commercial context is ideal for New York menswear, which is having something of a moment. With rappers such as A$AP Rocky and designers such as Hood by Air combining high fashion and street style to spectacular effect, not to mention the likes of young New Yorker Alexander Wang at the helm of revered Parisian fashion house Balenciaga, there’s a new generation of American dandies eager to mix avant garde fashion with sportswear and hip-hop (see the “health goth” micro-trend which bubbled up last winter). While luxe sportswear is a fashion trope as old as the hills, a new generation of designers, such as Public School and Coppens, are reinventing it precisely for the extremely hip dude on the street.
Or as Damien Paul, head of menswear at Matchesfashion.com, puts it: “We really seem to be witnessing a boom in menswear here – there’s a real energy coming from the young designers and brands that feels distinct from what’s happening in Europe. Tim Coppens was brilliant – he was really at the forefront of the elevated sportswear look that’s been so popular in menswear, and he just gets better and better.”
While the name Public School might evoke striped blazers and boaters, the designers Maxwell Osborne and Dao-Yi Chow mean it in the American sense: clothes rooted in New York’s street culture, given a high-fashion spin. The designers are currently riding high, applauded by both buyers and the fashion press, recently appointed creative directors of DKNY along with their own label. Their presentation saw the models (including singer Twin Shadow, who also did the music) in boxes, arranged police lineup style, wearing clothes that applied sharp tailoring to sportswear.
Compared to the overwhelmingly white catwalks of Paris and Milan, the Public School show was almost shockingly diverse, and there were plenty of models of colour at other designers’ shows too – even old-school stalwarts like Michael Kors, who talked through his wears, designed for a holiday in “Capri or Catalina” at a presentation rather than a catwalk show. “If it was up to me we wouldn’t do a runway show for women,” he told the audience. “I just think especially for menswear for us it’s all about the fabrics, the details, really being able to see things up close.”
Whether the shows themselves really expressed the excitement of menswear in New York, however, seemed a moot point. Traditionally, the designers in New York fashion week have been regarded as showing the more commercial side of fashion, as opposed to the polish of Milan, the eccentricity of London, or the hardcore cutting-edge glamour of Paris. While outrageously dressed men thronged the streets outside, many of the clothes on show seemed comparatively conservative.
“The American aesthetic is a different aesthetic to what we have in London,” ponders Luke Day, editor of GQ Style. “In London it’s clothes that are full of ideas and influence things rather than being things that the masses buy, so maybe this is for the masses. But maybe by having this, they might be able to build on that and there will be people who can come to the table that will have more ideas.”
Paul agreed: “It would be great if NYFWM can have the same impact as LCM on American designers, and encourage them to be bolder.” The one thing everyone agreed on was that New York fashion week men’s was here to stay. For the man in the crocheted top … maybe next season?
She’s one of the world’s busiest models, but her film roles in Mad Max: Fury Road and Ruben Guthrie have given Abbey Lee fresh perspective on the lucrative but often brutal world of fashion and its pursuit of perfection
Companies that make products from leather are facing tough times: the supply of leather is dwindling as fewer people eat meat, with the US cattle population dropping by 32% in the last few decades. Meanwhile, demand for leather hasn’t followed suit. The global luggage and leather goods industry is predicted to grow at a compounded rate of 4.5% annually through 2018, in part as a result of growth in the travel industry and increasing consumer wealth.
Modern Meadow, a New York startup, is hoping it can find the solution to this problem at the bottom of a petri dish.
The company is experimenting with cultured animal cells and tissues to create an alternative biomaterial to traditional leather. This lab-grown leather could offer a more sustainable alternative and even a possible longterm bridge for the gap in supply and demand.
Suzanne Lee, Modern Meadow’s creative director, claims the leather also could eliminate defects generally seen in leather, such as scars and inconsistency in quality and color. It could also offer a new frontier of material and design development – properties such as durability, elasticity, strength and water resistance can be controlled and altered – resulting in options that aren’t possible with leather from cows, she says.
Alternatives to farm-grown leather already exist, but so far, they have been inorganic – not biodegradable – and heavy contributors to environmental pollution.
Charles Margulis, media director at the Center for Environmental Health, a group that tests accessories for toxins, says the production of PVC – such as that used in ‘pleather’ – has been linked to cancer, while other petroleum-based plastics used in fake leather contribute to climate change. This is often compounded by the use of dyes that contain toxins, including lead. “In 2014, about one out of every five fake leather items we tested contained lead,”Margulis says.
Modern Meadow aims to create an organic alternative that doesn’t harm animals or the planet. It plans to begin limited pilot production on lab-grown leather as early as next year.
But it’s a long way from the lab to the market. And despite the shrinking supply, the industry may not be ready for lab-grown leather.
One issue, according to UK Leather Federation director Kerry Senior, is that there have been many occasions in which companies have misrepresented lower-quality synthetics – or materials made from leather waste – as leather. That could make it a harder sell for alternative materials claiming to be leather.
Senior points to a case where the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission found Toyota to be misleading and deceptive in describing their car interiors as leather, in advertising and promotional materials, when they were only partially made of leather. “Terms such as faux leather, synthetic leather, leatherette, vegan leather and bonded leather are misleading to consumers and damaging to the leather industry, particularly when those products fail to perform as well as leather.”
Ben Wurgaft, a historian based at MIT who is writing a book about laboratory-grown meat, applauds Modern Meadow’s ambitions but says that, given the speed at which fashion changes, the company’s success depends on whether it can scale up quickly.
Continual funding, he says, is not a certainty, which means that the company is racing against the clock to develop product and hit a widespread market. “If their loop of production and profit doesn’t hum within a certain number of years, it may have implications for their ability to achieve some of their longer-range goals, including more sophisticated types of materials research and development.”
Even though environmentalists and animal activists often criticize the leather industry for its pollution – especially of tannery effluent – and the killing of animals, the demand for the material has not diminished. Automotive leather is the most notable sector for growth, currently the fastest growing sector for leather use, Senior says, who also notes that the value of global exports of finished bovine leather, far and away the largest sub-sector of leather, grew by 33% between 2010 and 2014. Although demand for leather is high, he says, large increases in the cost of hides and skins following the global economic crash in 2008 has meant that tanners have seen their margins severely squeezed.
Suzanne Lee, creative director at Modern Meadow, says there are fewer hides to go around and quality is unpredictable. Across the board, from low-end to high-end luxury, Lee says, designers and brands are looking for an assured supply of high-quality leather and it just isn’t there. She hopes to fill this niche.
At a TED talk two years ago, Modern Meadow CEO Andras Forgacs held up a transparent material cultured entirely from bovine cells. Samples like that one will be part of a material library portfolio Modern Meadow plans to share with designers and brands. The company can then tune these capabilities to meet the designers’ preferences.
Last year, Senior attended a Forgacs presentation in the UK and was able to touch the samples. “It felt like cling film,” he says. “I don’t think they have anything that would be a useful substitute for leather.”
One of the biggest challenges, though, is that lab-grown leather does not meet any of the acceptable definitions of leather, which is typically described as “hide or skin with its original fibrous structure more or less intact, tanned to be imputrescible”, Senior says.
Lee admits that the company still has a long way to go in terms of research and development, producing the leather, and being able to provide product samples. She also says the research and development samples shown at presentations in no way reflect the finished product that would be available once the company reaches commercial production, or even pilot testing.
The startup got its big break last year when Horizons Ventures, the venture fund of Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing, funded it to the tune of $10m. Today, Modern Meadow shares its Brooklyn space with the Gates Foundation-funded International AIDS Vaccine Initiative, which is developing two AIDS vaccines.
Lee and her colleagues see their materials program as much more than replicating leather. What she and colleagues find exciting, she says, is that they can produce something that is leaning in the direction of bio-mimicry or a completely new material. “We plan to also create composites that looks nothing like an animal product at all and are high-performance biomaterial.”
Their primary aim, through their materials and foods programs, is to benefit the environment and animals. Unlike with traditional leather processes, there is no hair, flesh or fat to remove. The material can also be scaled to size, significantly reducing or eliminating waste. The result, Lee says, will be an incredibly light footprint. “We are constantly looking for efficiencies along the way and in every process we currently do.” This includes challenging themselves to use less packaging, less water and to shorten timeframes at the research and development level.
But there can be a big difference between theory and reality, and Senior remains skeptical. Even if the technology has advanced since he last saw samples and even if it could be usable as an alternative to leather, Senior doesn’t think it will be made in sufficient quantity or at a cost to be a viable option for most brands. It is interesting work, and the technology that is being developed could very well be the future for many products, Senior says.
He adds, though: “I suspect it will be a distant future.”
Demand for summer dresses and festival wear helped business boom for online fashion retailer Asos, which said annual sales would be at the top of forecasts.
The company, whose customers include Michelle Obama and Samantha Cameron, said retail sales for the four months to 30 June increased 20%, or 24% allowing for currency movements.
Sales in Britain rose 27% and international sales, worth about 60% of the total, were up 16%, or 23% in constant currencies. For the year that ends on 31 August, sales will be at the high end of Asos’s previous guidance of 15% to 20%.
Nick Robertson, Asos’s chief executive, said top-selling items included sequinned mini skirts, structured sun dresses, dungarees and boots for festivals bought by customers in their 20s.
“Festivals and dresses for holidays were really, really strong for us,” he said.
In the UK, new brands such as Misguided and Boohoo helped increase sales. The company also extended its cutoff time for next-day delivery to midnight from 10pm and simplified its smartphone app.
Asos’s strong trading is a turnaround from last year when three profit warnings in six months rocked its position as a stock market favourite valued at £6bn.
The company, which sells in about 200 countries, blamed weak international sales caused by the strong pound making goods expensive and it also suffered a fire at its main depot in Barnsley.
“A year ago our UK performance was OK but where we were struggling was international. That was with the currency working against us and we were unable back then to change our prices in international territories.”
Asos installed software so it could adjust prices quickly to compete in particular countries. It has cut prices but better stock control and strong full-price sales have helped keep gross profit margins steady when analysts had expected a sharp fall.
High-street fashion retailers suffered slow spring sales because of cold weather, prompting many to launch their sales early. Robertson said the unseasonal weather had little effect on Asos.
“We are very global and we are not reliant on the UK,” he said. The company is on track to reach its target of £2.5bn annual sales soon, Robertson said without being more specific.
Andrew Wade, an analyst at stockbroker Numis, increased his estimate for annual pre-tax profit to £46.5m from £45.8m. Profit last year was £43.9m.
Wade said: “We are seeing clear positive results and a business which has regained its momentum.”
Asos shares, which were valued at £70 in February 2014, were down 2.5% at £37.45 in lunchtime trading. After plunging in 2014, they have gained about 50% this year.
There’s nothing the fashion pack enjoys more than a designer debut – so the presentation of Bertrand Guyon’s first collection for the recently revived Schiaparelli label was guaranteed a good turnout. The sight of Meg Ryan’s wavy blond bob in the front row confirmed it as a bit of a moment; the Hollywood star is not the sort of celebrity who tips up to any old catwalk show.
In the 1930s, Elsa Schiaparelli had a hand in the creation of so many fashion staples – from jumpsuits to culottes – and worked with Salvador Dali on surreal creations such as the famous dress painted with lobsters. Guyon did not go down the zany route, though, to pay his respects. Monday’s show was more about fabric and technical accomplishment over anything too zany: a dark-green satin trouser suit embroidered with gold stucco, luxurious brocade coats in “Turkey red” and onyx, multi-coloured minks, tweed suits, cashmere culottes.
There were eccentric touches, such as a picture of Elsa’s face on a fur skirt and a strapless gown made of silk faille and organza painted with what show notes described as an “unfinished” classical decor.
Schiaparelli may not be a household name today, but she was a force of nature in her day. Coco Chanel’s biggest rival back then, she preceded Miuccia Prada’s brainy, subversive ugly-chic by half a century. Over the past few years, Diego Della Valle (the Italian CEO of Tod’s) has overseen efforts to relaunch the house. The first revival show was designed by Christian Lacroix, the next two by Marco Zanini. Last season, Zanini departed and the collection was conceived by the in-house design team. Guyon’s appointment was announced in April.
Also at the Hotel d’Evereux were French-Algerian actor and supermodel Farida Khelfa – a brand ambassador and muse to Schiaparelli – resplendent in the house’s signature shade, le shocking pink. Guyon’s former employers, Valentino bosses Maria Grazia Chiuri and Pierpaolo Piccioli, were there too, now playing a supportive role, proving that fashion is not all back-stabbing and hauteur.
Wallis Simpson was the ultimate jolie-laide Schiaparelli customer, and there was definitely a touch of her spirit in the collection, particularly in the sumptuous midnight blue velvet dresses embroidered with crystals. Some might say that the 1940s vibe felt a little too strong at times – particularly as the models’ hair was braided into the shape of victory rolls. The final look, though, was the picture all the well-heeled crowd wanted to Instagram: a flowing, backless chiffon dress in Schiaparelli’s signature shocking pink, a timeless and very red carpet-appropriate take on the trope the house is most famous for.
A few weeks ago I read about a fashion advert that has been banned by the ASA. But what confuses me is why the advert existed in the first place. It seems to show a very ill girl lying on the floor – why would that sell clothes?
Ah, Patrick, Patrick, Patrick. I do not know what you do in life, Patrick, as your email was tantalisingly succinct, but I do know that you have – unwittingly, I suspect – taken on the role of truth-teller in this instance. Not for nothing does the tale of The Emperor’s New Clothes use fashion as a metaphor and you, Patrick, are the young boy pointing your finger at the king’s nudity.
As you say, earlier this month the Advertising Standards Authority banned an advert for the label Saint Laurent, which showed a strikingly thin model lying on the floor. Here is the ASA’s full statement on the advert:
“The ASA considered that the model’s pose and the particular lighting effect in the ad drew particular focus to the model’s chest, where her rib cage was visible and appeared prominent, and to her legs, where her thighs and knees appeared a similar width, and which looked very thin, particularly in light of her positioning and the contrast between the narrowness of her legs and her platform shoes. We therefore considered that the model appeared unhealthily underweight in the image and concluded that the ad was irresponsible.” Saint Laurent’s response was – and I’m translating from the French, of course – “Like, whatever” (that is a paraphrase, but only very, very slightly. Incidentally, it might be worth noting that this advert appeared in Elle, a magazine that in 2013 announced it would be “rebranding feminism”. I’m going to assume, judging from the magazine’s decision to publish an advert featuring a seemingly distressed and very skinny young woman, that this continues to be a work in progress.)
Any sane person – one such as yourself, Patrick – looks at this photo and is repulsed. Fashion people, however, look at it and see the height of chic. So what, you rightly ask, is going on here? Now, I’ve criticised fashion a lot in this column over the years. I’ve also defended elements of it, too, saying that the value of an industry expressly aimed at women and largely staffed by women, from the high-end designers (Miuccia Prada, Donna Karan, Vivienne Westwood) to the high street designers (Jane Shepherdson, Kate Bostock, Jenna Lyons) to the editors and journalists, should not be underrated. But there is no doubt that there are some disgusting elements to the fashion business.
Much – so much – has been written about fashion’s obsession with skinniness, but I think that what is really going on here is often overlooked. Because it’s not female skinniness that the fashion world fetishises – it’s female frailty.
For all the nonsense that some designers talk about loving “strong women”, “proud women”, “sexy women”, and blah di blah di flipping blah, it’s notable how fond these same designers are of putting women in clothes that specifically hobble them. Perilously high heels, most obviously, but also whacking great handbags, constrictive clothes, flat-out uncomfortable clothes, clothes that only look good on the very thin, and incapacitatingly expensive price tags. Fashion trends often explicitly celebrate this frailty. When chunky heels were in fashion eight or so years ago, a Vogue fashion writer explained in the magazine that she loved this look because it made her resemble “a baby fawn learning to walk”. Rachel Zoe is probably the most influential fashion stylist of the past 20 years, and the look she championed so successfully a decade ago was all about making women look frail: bug-eyed sunglasses, enormous handbags, oversized patterned kaftans that on anyone other than the severely underweight would look like sofas. Tatler memorably and accurately dubbed the look “dead socialite”.
I like Saint Laurent’s clothes and I also like its designer, Hedi Slimane, who is probably one of the canniest operators on the scene now. But he undoubtedly has a fascination with frailty, or at least vulnerability. When he was a menswear designer, his great muse was Pete Doherty, who he photographed adoringly. Now that he is making womenswear, his icon seems to be a young woman leaving a nightclub at 5am, utterly wasted and barely able to make her way to the taxi rank.
This isn’t a problem just in the fashion world: the media itself loves to hound frail women – stalking Lindsay Lohan, for example, in the hope that she might overdose in front of them. But there, the attitude is one of prurience. In the fashion world, it is more voyeuristic and celebratory, like an immature teenager who thinks that a rock star who kills himself is just so deep, or that idiotic tendency of idiots to romanticise self-styled bohemians who destroy themselves with hard drugs. I have no time for any of this nonsense, and neither does anyone with a maturity level greater than that of a 14-year-old, which apparently includes the ASA, and my correspondent Patrick. As for you, fashion, grow up.
Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
A host of transparency tools are available to consumers wanting to assess the transparency of brands, yet to date their direct impact on consumer behaviour appears to have been nominal at best. 
Steve New, associate professor at the Saïd Business School and an expert on supply chain management, says this is in part because consumers don’t make much of an effort to understand the supply chain, though when they do “they are generally well-meaning and horrified to discover the environmental degradation and forced labour that exist in the making of their favourite products,” he says.
Although still a relatively small proportion of shoppers, use of these tools could be on the rise. Rank a Brand, which grades brands based on labour conditions as well as environmental and climate protection, has seen visitors increase from 102,500 in 2012 to 584,600 so far this year.
Free2Work, a project of Not For Sale, which ranks brands based on their efforts to prevent forced and child labour through the supply chain, experienced a similar rise until last year, when funding dried up. This is a common challenge as many transparency tools are run by NGOs, which must balance competing objectives with limited budgets.Managing budgets for marketing and even updating software to match ever-changing technology can be a challenge.
Scott Kennedy, CEO of for-profit company OpenLabel, says he hopes to make significant strides in transparency through marketing and technological development. There are ways to leverage explosions of visitor access, he says, and tricks to get the right data to people at the right time. Kennedy has innovated a platform that follows the model of Yelp and TripAdvisor, where users and NGOs can give feedback on products.
A key to success, says Kennedy, is capitalising on temporary spikes of consumer interest, no matter how brief. But determining when spikes will occur is a challenge. It turns out that increases in visitors after an industry-related tragedy can’t be expected. Often times, says Elin Eriksson, research analyst at Not For Sale, there is no change at all. What’s more, says Mario Dziamski, head of research at Rank a Brand, spikes may only last a day.
“The number of visitors that went to our site did increase by around 75% on the anniversary of the Rana Plaza collapse in Bangladesh last year,” says Dziamski. The day after, however, these numbers went back to normal. On the second anniversary, visitor numbers did not change.
This is because consumers won’t work hard to seek out information, says Kennedy, and generally have short attention spans. Even so, he believes consumers do want guidance. He conducted a poll in 2013 where 81% of the 2,140 participants said that, aside from labels and advertisements, they turn to the internet to research brands. “Information isn’t transferred as much through word of mouth in the real world as it once was,” says Kennedy. “This is good news for mobile-centric approaches to solving the issue of transparency.”
Tracking where visitors go after using transparency tools is essential to know whether visitors purchase from the brands they research. Neither OpenLabel nor Free2Work currently includes tracking, though they plan to do so.
WeGreen, an innovative German tool that ranks products and brands based on transparency and social and environmental sustainability, is already tracking the click-and-buy behaviour of its visitors. The company uses a traffic colour-coding system: green for good, yellow for mediocre and red for bad, making it easy for German and non-German speakers alike to assess the sustainability of a wide range of products. 
WeGreen also crowdfunded a pioneering add-on to Firefox, Chrome and Safari that is set to launch next month. If the consumer researches an item with a yellow or red colour code, WeGreen gives recommendations for alternative products.
Maurice Stanszus, CEO of WeGreen, says he worked with several research institutes to analyse the behaviour of the transparency tool’s visitors. Data analysis revealed that 81.2% of consumers who researched products on WeGreen over the past five years and then went on to make purchases bought sustainable products. 
Still, experts see transparency tools less as a way to change consumer behaviour than as a way to change the nature of discourse with business. In some senses, says New, it doesn’t really matter if only a few consumers use the tools if it means that, overall, firms change their practices.
Eriksson agrees. Not for Sale’s newest fashion report (due to launch later this month), which looks at brands such as H&M, Zara (Inditex), Adidas and Gap, shows that 66% of companies rated in both 2013 and 2015 improved their grades. Furthermore, says Eriksson, brands were 39% more responsive when approached for feedback in 2015 than in 2013. “This indicates an increase in the importance and prioritisation from the business community to engage with civil society organisations on this issue,” says Eriksson.
Brands are more scared of a story in a high-readership publication, which can have complex reputational effects, says New, than they are of consumers using an app as they trudge around Wal-Mart or shop online. Tools make the story more salient, says New, by being part of a bigger picture of how we understand our culpability in the systems of production and consumption.
“Provenance tools are ways of opening the debate and also providing some fuel for activists and academics,” says New. “This is not to be sniffed at.”
Fashion, this week, feels particularly unfashionable. A campaign image by Saint Laurent was banned after the Advertising Standards Agency upheld a complaint that the model, Kiki Willems, looked too thin. Their statement reads like doctors notes, the kind of thing you’d read over someone’s shoulder in a hospital lift, and feel quite faint before you looked away. It’s worth quoting at length. “The model’s pose and the particular lighting effect in the ad drew particular focus to the model’s chest, where her rib cage was visible and appeared prominent, and to her legs, where her thighs and knees appeared a similar width, and which looked very thin, particularly in light of her positioning and the contrast between the narrowness of her legs and her platform shoes.” They’ve described the image pretty well, only leaving out that her position is that of a body that has fallen from a great height, or at least from a wobbly chair. She’s lying on the carpet of a conference room, despairing.
Many designers share Hedi Slimane’s (of Saint Laurent) obsession with the aesthetics of rock’n’roll. But there are many rock’n’rolls. Rather than the noisy, drunken fun of a band performing, of a big night out in a university town or a singer confronting her crowd with her massive voice and massive cleavage, some concentrate on the bit after. Not just backstage, because there’s still some happiness there – a plate of seedless grapes, some public sex on a tea-coloured futon. No, this is the bit after the bit after. Some designers stop at the sleaze and the strut, others are inspired by darker places at the end of rock’n’roll, dressing their models as people barely alive. “Swallow your joy!” a photographer is surely shouting, somewhere, “Think of the saddest song in the world, and hum it silently! We are all dying!” And this attitude seeps across the brands – it’s in the cut of the trousers, the slump of the models – but rather than the cool thrill presumably intended, for me it infuses everything with a sad sickness, the smell of burning.
The interesting thing about the ASA’s statement is that it has been careful to avoid any judgment on the weight of the model, instead focusing on exactly what was unacceptable about the image itself. Too often, when boring on about the problem with the fashion industry and body image, the fact that a fashion image is created is forgotten and the model within the image is critiqued directly. If a model’s legs look terrifyingly thin, it’s likely that the stylist wants you to see them that way. It’s not just the clothes that are styled, it’s the body itself. Shadows. Angles. The way she leans. Out of a hundred shots of a girl in a room, some labels will choose the one that suggests something awful happened out by the car.
You can’t tell from a photo whether or not a person is healthy. You can try, but you’ll probably be wrong. And this is never more true than with a fashion image, which has been manipulated and massaged by people who know exactly what they’re doing, until it is almost art. Which is why attempts to police the weight of fashion models seem often to be passing the blame on to the women, when they should be concentrating their anger on the labels that endorse them.
More and more, I think one of the most important subjects for children at school is media studies. Yes, I hear pisses being taken. The words “media studies”, when I did my A-Levels, anyway, were always accompanied by a little sideways snort. But where else are you taught to read an image? Where else will we learn that adverts are built up from dust, created to make you feel feelings that will quietly lead you to their online shop?
Ideally, less stuff would be banned. Ideally fewer images would be censored. So one way to avoid this, surely, is to give everybody the tools to see an advert like Saint Laurent’s and then, like soft bread, simply tear it apart.
Imagine sitting next to the most important people in your industry for a four day event. At least seven times per day, there will be little lulls of anywhere between a few minutes and an hour. The person you are talking to could be a friendly new face, a frosty acquaintance or a former colleague you would rather stab yourself in the face than talk to, again, about their dachshund’s behavioural problems. The only thing that is guaranteed is that you will be seeing them repeatedly.
Those are the tricky conversational conditions of fashion shows – where making good small talk is as crucial to creating a good impression as wearing the right shoes. Well, almost. As London’s menswear fashion shows – London Collections Men – begins in the capital, here are some tips in smalltalk from some of the most charming people in menswear.
“I introduce myself immediately if we don’t know each other,” says the Observer’s menswear editor Helen Seamons, “because the likelihood is I’ll be sitting next to them at another show and the longer you leave it the more awkward it is.”
“Your last issue looked great,” is a great start with a fashion editor. “I’d only say it with something I actually liked,” says Seamons, “but of course you’re giving someone a massive compliment so they are unlikely to be frosty back.”
“You might see that someone had been on a press trip on Instagram, so you can ask about that,” says Seamons. Talking about social media can be fertile ground, too. Esquire fashion director Catherine Hayward started an Instagram hashtag – #doyouthinkheworksinfashion – with which she tags pictures of snappy male dresses. Once those talking to her know about it, they often start finding her examples or sending her pictures to her for post. The iPhone can be helpful, too, when all conversational avenues have been exhausted. “Later in the day nobody is going to think you’re rude if you start checking your emails or Instagramming,” says Seamons.
Idiosyncratic small chat will either horrify whoever is sitting next to you (in which case they are just not your kind of person) or start a genuine conversation that swerves cliches. Andrew Davis, creative director of Wonderland and Rollacoaster, deploys icebreakers are often funny phrases from his childhood, such as quotes from Victoria Wood. He might point to an item on the catwalk and say: “That’s the blue of our Margaret’s shower curtain there.”
“A lot of people arrive at the first fashion show in a city and immediately get busy by rushing up to everyone they know,” says GQ editor-in-chief Dylan Jones. “I never do this. I simply talk to the people I am sitting next to, and treat them both as you would at a dinner party, bouncing between both, being respectful, and trying to keep everything as light as possible.”
See a scrum of photographers? Definitely ask those next to you who is in there – or go over, have a look, and report back. “A few journalists who will remain nameless,” says Hayward, “can be relied upon to start the day hungover – you can tell when they are wearing dark glasses inside – and are a great source of naughty post-midnight stories.” In other words, know the best sources for gossip, tap them early, and you will have something to share all day. Otherwise, Hayward will ask her companion for gossip – or even make gossip up: “And see if the bogus piece of gossip comes back to me the next day.”
“I wouldn’t criticise what anyone else is wearing,” says Seamons, “But I would mention it if they look nice.” Jones agrees: “So many people like to get bitter and twisted at fashion shows, being rude and bitchy about the designers, the stylists, the journalists etc. But I always think that if you don’t enjoy your industry then you should get out of it and let younger, more enthusiastic people take over.”
If things go a bit quiet, says Davis, it’s time to ask the person next to you about their show crush. “It’s normally someone new on the scene,” he says. “A buyer from New York or a member of the foreign press. The person you make a beeline for at an evening event when you can’t talk anymore to the rest of the pack. The kind of person you would tell your life story to after two glasses of Champagne or where you buy your bedding plants from.”
“You can always just talk about the show,” says Seamons. “That is, after all, the common ground.”
“Not so applicable to London but it works in Milan and Paris. You can ask, when did you get here? Then you go into the whole process of how your journey was, what you did last night – there’s always a bit of competition about how many dinners you are invited to and attending,” says Hayward.
Jones says resorting to cliche can be fatal. If you go for, “You’ve done it again!” “Only you could have designed that …” or “What can I say?”, he says, “the designer will know that you hated their show.”
After a late night and a long day of shows, it can be tempting to say how tired you are. “I can’t bear, ‘I’m knackered,’”, says Davis. “My reply is always: ‘Its so hard watching models walk, getting in chauffeured cars and eating your own bodyweight in finger food. Try a six-hour shift in a kitchen, in summer, in the most godawful footwear.’
The fight for closet space is hotting up. These days, conscious consumers have zero tolerance of badly made pieces of uncertain provenance. Instead, they’re on the lookout for clothes and accessories that offer ethics, endurance, style, and innovation (order according to taste). So how do four new kids on the block stand up and who deserves house room?
Backstory: From menswear designer Tom Cridland – and appealing for hearts, minds and wallets on Kickstarter right now – is the 30-Year Sweatshirt. It is designed to last for – yes – 30 years. In 2014 he launched a trouser collection (also under his own brand name) where he produced high quality trousers sourcing the best cotton and working with seamstresses in Portugal. High-spec material and production seem to be his thing. I approve.
Aesthetics: To all intents and purposes, this is just a crewneck sweatshirt but, if it’s to hold together for 30 years, it needs to be a classic design. Cridland is uncompromising on quality so he has gone for organic cotton (which he informs us with admirable nerdish relish weighs 360g/sq m. Cheap cotton by contrast would be much lighter, as it’s bulked out with chemcial fillers). The double reinforced stitching comes from the hands of seamstresses in rural Portugal, some with 50 years’ experience and using the finest quality yarns.
Ethical credentials: Organic cotton, traceable ethical production line – but the big sell is the 30-Year Guarantee, as Tom Cridland offers a wardrobe buffer that cocks a snook at fast fashion and disposability. He insists it’s not a gimmick.
Verdict: Even if it was [a gimmick] I rather like it. Cridland has created a simple, playful concept that actually takes the pain out of making a load of ethical decisions. It’s a great distillation of lots of ethical principles and ideas about clothing into one product, folding in concepts like price per wear and quality translating into endurance. It remains to be seen whether the murphy’s law that applies to all warranties will apply to his sweatshirt: ie it will break one day after its 30th birthday – but it’s well worth the risk to find out.
Backstory: Designer Valerie Goode took to sustainability when she trained at London College of Fashion. But it was a year spent a year working in mainstream fashion, designing evening gowns in China where she witnessed “horrendous pollution” that proved decisive. She returned to the UK, determined to make wearable, commercial fashion without a deadly footprint. The result? Kitty Ferreira, named after her beloved grandmother who had strong principles and a great sense of style.
Ethical credentials: Here’s a designer that wants to take control of her production and is determined to seek out the best. She works with a sewing room in London and is – as previously mentioned – very serious about low impact dyes and fabrics. Her spring/summer collection utilised upcycled cottons and chiffons but for the next collection – out September – Goode has opted for peace (or so-called cruelty free) silk. This is a balance between her strong principles and her recognition that she needs a uniform supply of fabric to produce a commercial collection rather than upcycled offcuts for one off pieces. She was also uncomfortable that there was so little awareness of sericulture (silk farming) and the fact that between 40,000 and 50,000 silkworms are killed in the process of making enough silk for one blouse. By interrogating the supply chain, she found a supplier of peace silk where the pupae isn’t killed.
Aesthetic: Goode a) works brilliantly in silk and b) knows how to dress women of all shapes – Kitty Feirra sizes run from six to 26. Begone any lingering sustainable-equals-hairy-hippie connotations, because this is sleek, commercial and often very sexy. Goode has particularly won fans through her wide-legged (diaphanous) trouser shapes – but the sheer blazer also works a treat.
Verdict: Goode makes clothes that are for boardroom activists rather than penniless heroes that climb up cooling towers, but she’s a real talent and ethical fashion obsesses about people who can mainstream. The test will be how she stays true to her principles and keeps control as her collections, reach and production grows.
Backstory: Alex Noble has worked with Lady Gaga, Florence Welch and Kylie Minogue, producing couture pieces for stage and music videos. But it seems to have left a void. This tie up with Traidremade (Textile Recycling and International Development charity, a familiar fixture in diverting textiles from waste) comes “after a long period of questioning and searching for meaning and worth with in my commercial practice”.
Ethical credentials: I’m a big fan of Traidremade, founded in 2002 and which has dealt with the onslaught of “fashion waste” from spiralling levels of consumerism with ingenuity and a deep commitment to sorting out the mayhem underneath. Originally, Traid picked pieces off the conveyor belt, and majored in customisation. With this collection the label has moved into luxury upcycling territory. Alex Nobel confesses to being similarly enamoured: “I am continually educated, enthused and inspired by Traid’s ethos, team, structure and projects.”
Aesthetic: This is heart-on-sleeve-wearing stuff, or a reworked jumper with “rights” emblazoned on. Noble describes his 14 piece capsule collection as “a departure from the avant-garde stage costumes people know me for but a return to my roots of street wear, tomboys and culture clash”. And he has really enjoyed himself and given do-gooding design a turbo-charged boost too.
Verdict: You can’t really argue with the focus of this collection. All profits go to the Traid fund in Bangladesh, specifically in this case to register and get hold of birth certificates for 140 garment worker’s children which in turn will enable them to access education (garment workers in the mainstream supply chain wouldn’t ordinarily earn enough to afford to do this). The Rights of Massive styling is hardly stealth sustainable style but it perfectly matches the designers philosophy, “creative input, positive output” and isn’t that what designer fashion hook ups should do?
Available online www.traidremade.com or at pop up star: 2 Berwick Street, London, W1F 0DR.
Backstory: Mosevic is a new Cornish brand with a lot of swagger. With admirable aplomb, the founders, Jack and Alex (who met when they studied 3D Design for Sustainability at Falmouth University) claim their range of accessories to be the most exciting development in denim since Jacob Davis’ idea of blue jeans was bankrolled by Levi Strauss.
The product: They hope their concept – solid denim, an actual material developed by Mosevic from denim pieces and resin and handmade into sunglasses – will be partially bankrolled by Kickstarter (less than two weeks to go but doing rather well).
Ethical credentials: Startup companies in Cornwall seem to think they are inherently at one with the environment, and I’ve no cause to doubt this. But in this case, a strong background in sustainability adds weight. “We are very aware of the impact that irresponsible manufacturing can have on the environment and that effects the design process at every stage,” says Jack. The aim is to find a consistent supply of overstock and offcuts to produce from by summer 2016 which would give Solid Denim a greater ethical kick as then it will be made from waste.
Aesthetic: The founders claim Solid Denim is extremely strong and durable, designs are purposefully simple with no excessive branding and Mosevic reminds customers that their inspiration is Levi’s at the Forefront of fashion yet unchanged over decades (we’ll ignore that Twisted Seams episode). In short, no 30 year guarantee (above) but customers are warned “to expect them to look as good in 20 years as they do today”.
Verdict: In truth today’s mainstream denim industry isn’t very innovative, so it’s extremely exciting to see a new denim idea, particularly with sustainable ambitions. Get it right and the brand will have developed not just a sustainable product, but a sustainable manufacturing and production process, in Cornwall. I wouldn’t call them an eco brand just yet, as there is a lot to be done but that won’t bother Mosevic who don’t want to brand themselves as “eco friendly” in any case. They’re too cool for that.
Christopher Bailey, the fashion designer who was put in charge of the luxury label Burberry last year, could be given shares worth up to £50m from free handouts and shares awarded for bonuses over the coming years.
Details of the huge potential rewards were revealed as the fashion group attempted to prevent a shareholder revolt over boardroom pay by issuing a detailed explanation of the £8m in shares and cash paid to Bailey last year.
The luxury retailer, known for its trademark beige check, admitted it had not previously given a “sufficiently clear” explanation of Bailey’s remuneration.
The company was responding to shareholders’ concerns after last year’s AGM, when 52.7% voted against the pay deal for Bailey, who had just been appointed to replace Angela Ahrendts after her departure to become Apple’s retail boss.
Burberry’s effort to appease investors comes before the AGM of WPP on Tuesday when the advertising company is also braced for a row over a £43m pay deal for its boss, Sir Martin Sorrell.
When Burberry promoted its designer Bailey to the role of chief executive, it allowed him to retain his previous title of chief creative – and some light was shed on his pay deals.
But it was not until Burberry’s annual report was published on Monday that the size of Bailey’s shareholding was revealed.
While he owns 300,000 shares outright, he could end up with more than 3m – worth almost £50m at current share prices – from free awards and shares with performance criteria attached.
In a letter to shareholders, Ian Carter, the non-executive director who chairs Burberry’s remuneration committee, describes Bailey’s importance to the company in the 14 years before he was installed as designer.
“Over that period, he led the creative side, overseeing everything the customer sees and touches including brand imagery, product design and development, creative marketing and architecture,” said Carter, who is also president of Hilton Hotels.
Carter admits that “the quantum and structure” of Bailey’s pay look unusual in a UK context. Bailey has a salary of £1.1m as well as a £440,000 “cash allowance”, and in the 2014-15 financial year Bailey received a total of £8m. That included £4.4m from a longterm incentive plan together with his salary, allowance and annual bonus of £1.7m. 
In the past he has been awarded shares in exceptional bonuses: 350,000 in 2010, which he will receive in the coming weeks; and in 2013, to stop him leaving, he was awarded 1m shares – worth £15m. “Put simply, the market value for his creative talent was far in excess of what he was earning,” said Carter.
The company also revealed that Bailey has agreed to increase his personal shareholding in the company by the time of this year’s AGM on 16 July.
He is to take immediate steps to increase his outright ownership to 500,000 shares. However, he will do this not by buying shares in the company – which change hands at about £16.50 each – but by agreeing not to sell all 350,000 of the shares awarded to him in 2010. These are due to be handed over just before the AGM and he will keep half to “demonstrate his commitment to Burberry and alignment with shareholders”.
Bailey was also awarded 500,000 shares, which will be released to him between 2017 and 2019, when he was promoted last year. The company has now provided more detail about the performance criteria attached to these awards – a mixture of financial, strategic and personal targets.
Carter said: “Christopher Bailey is clearly in demand in the international luxury space and the board is delighted that he chosen to stay at Burberry”.
The annual report said that Bailey will not receive a rise in his salary this year but it also revealed that the new finance director Carol Fairweather had an 11% rise on her salary, to £500,000, last year.
It also shows that Ahrendts – named as the highest paid woman in the US when she received $82.6m as a result of her signing-on fee from Apple – was paid £150,000 last year from Burberry under the terms of her departure package.
The rows of glasses glint on impeccably laid tables, inviting guests to pair wines with chocolate or Turkish delight beneath the cloud-capped Hottentots Holland mountains. Established by the governor of the Cape in the 18th century, the sumptuous Lourensford Wine Estate spans 4,000 hectares and contains vineyards, apple, plum and pear trees and beehives, as well as an art gallery, coffee roastery and landscaped garden.
That the farm in South Africa’s celebrated wine country is owned by Christo Wiese, said to be the country’s fourth-richest man, will come as little surprise to those who have felt his spending power of late. The 73-year-old Afrikaner is moving into Britain in a big way. He has just snapped up two household names in short order: Sir Richard Branson’s gym chain Virgin Active for £682m and high-street fashion retailer New Look for £780m.
He is also backing a new UK fashion chain, Pep & Co, specialising in discount fashion and childrenswear for young mums. The first shop is due to open next month, in Kettering, Northants, and there should be 50 outlets open for business by the end of August.
It is a bold plan in a tough market, going up against rivals such as Primark, Matalan and the supermarket fashion labels, and Wiese has hired former Asda boss Andy Bond – who previously ran the grocer’s George clothing label – to mastermind the plan. The idea is to cash in on the booming demand for discount stores and provide a fashion shop for those who are regular customers at chains such Wilko, Poundland, Aldi and Iceland. The chain will focus on high-street outlets in smaller towns. “What the discounters have done in food, I hope we can do in fashion,” explains Bond.
Wiese certainly has the experience. His Pepkor group owns 3,700 clothes stores worldwide, including nearly 3,000 in southern Africa, a 500-store chain in Poland called Pepco, and growing businesses in the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Romania, Hungary, Australia and New Zealand.
Like many of the most successful retail entrepreneurs, Wiese also has deep pockets: Forbes puts his fortune at $6.5bn (£4.2bn). But this billionaire is not one for ostentatious displays of wealth: he still drives his own car and works from a third-floor office that has none of the glamour of the Lourensford Estate, or the stupendous ocean views enjoyed by many of Cape Town’s crème de la crème. Instead he remains where it all began, on an industrial estate where his parents founded the clothing chain Pep Stores, among carwashes and tuck shops in Parow East.
“It’s the most unfashionable suburb you can imagine,” says Marc Hasenfuss, editor-at-large of South Africa’s Financial Mail. “He certainly hasn’t got a view of the sea or the mountain. It’s drab and there are certainly no trappings of grandeur there, that’s for sure. He says this is where his constituency is: the people who are shopping at his stores.”
Wiese grew up in Upington in Northern Cape, the biggest but least populated province in the country, and his father was a smalltown businessman and farmer. “My dad drove a nice car, we had a nice home, we went on nice holidays,” he told South Africa’s Sunday Times newspaper in 2011.
He trained and worked as a lawyer, but in the 1960s joined the family business as an executive director at Pep Stores, which would grow to become Pepkor. He had brief forays into the diamond mining industry and politics, standing as a candidate for the Progressive Federal party – a forerunner of today’s opposition Democratic Alliance – in Simon’s Town in 1977. He came second.
He returned to Pepkor as chairman in 1980 and took the company public six years later. By then it had bought grocer Shoprite Holdings, which was later spun off and is now Africa’s biggest food retailer. Wiese had equity in both companies and now owns immensely lucrative stakes in Shoprite and Steinhoff, the South African firm that is the second biggest furniture seller in Europe with brands including Harveys, Bensons for Beds and Cargo. He also owns a stake in Iceland.
But his first attempt to crack Britain – with Poundstretcher and Your More Store – was not a roaring success. Hasenfuss says: “He’s certainly not dull. Even when he cocks it up, he’s interesting. He’s a hell of a brave investor.”
The recent audacious acquisitions of Virgin Active and New Look suggest that Wiese has lost none of his appetite. Hasenfuss adds: “I believe the guy’s addicted to it. He loves the risk. His eyes light up. Like other people with golf or surfing or whatever, he loves being in the game.”
Yet he appears to have made surprisingly few enemies. “When I did a cover story on him I was looking for that quote, ‘Christo’s a bastard’, and really struggled to find anyone to say a bad word about him. He’s an incredibly polite, decent person. He doesn’t hold grudges. I’ve been around for a long time and I’ve never heard, ‘Jeez, Christo screwed me’. I suppose he’s rich enough that he doesn’t need to.”
Wiese bought the Lourensford Wine Estate in 1998, vowing to preserve and protect its heritage, and attends financial meetings there monthly. In 2006 he hired Koos Jordaan to run the wine division. Wiese is not a wine aficionado but is partial to the estate’s chardonnay and Méthode Cap Classique, according to Jordaan. Sometimes he also come to the property to enjoy clay pigeon shooting.
“Christo is very charismatic and easygoing,” Jordaan says. “Always a smile, always a joke. He’s the kind of guy who would walk in here and say to the staff, how are you doing? He’s down-to-earth, not on a pedestal. He doesn’t have a chauffeur, even though he could afford 10. He’ll always tell stories about the olden times – in every meeting there’s always a lesson.”
Jordaan adds: “What I’ve learned from Christo is that once he’s made a move, he’s like a very good chess player: there are a few steps after that and a very long-term goal. That’s why he’s been successful. He’s been able to identify these opportunities and make the right moves.”
South Africa is one of the most unequal societies in the world, polarised between a super-rich, still largely white, elite that includes Wiese, and a black majority plagued by rampant unemployment. “Christo feels business in South Africa has a common responsibility of really uplifting South Africa and Africa, either by offering job opportunities or in other ways,” Jordaan says. “He’s still very optimistic about the future of South Africa and Africa. He says the resources still need to be developed. That’s why he’s still here.”
He is married to Caro, the daughter of the late Japie Basson, the leading politician dubbed a chameleon because of his habit of changing parties, and has three children, all in their 30s.
Wiese himself keeps a low political profile. He watches rugby and cricket and spends time helping conservation efforts on his game farm in the Kalahari desert. “I still enjoy what I’m doing, which is building businesses,” he said recently. “I don’t play golf. I don’t have any particular passion apart from my business and my family, and that gives me all the pleasure that I want.”
Retirement, evidently, is unthinkable. Syd Vianello, a retail analyst, says: “In his world it’s about achieving the next business deal and that’s what gives him a kick. It’s a bit strange to go into the UK at this time of life, but it’s in his DNA.”
Britain has not always been a happy hunting ground for Wiese. In a strange incident in 2009, he was stopped with almost £700,000 in cash in a suitcase while boarding a plane at London City airport. But he has since had the money returned to him in full after his lawyers were able to demonstrate that the sum was a drop in the ocean of his personal fortune.
The amounts changing hands for Virgin Active and New Look appear to illustrate the point.
A weird thing happened to me at the London premiere of Andrew Morgan’s documentary The True Cost, last week. As co-executive producer with campaigner Livia Firth, I introduced the film to a very starry audience (including Tom Ford wearing aviators) and nestled into my seat.
But when my big face loomed into shot on the giant screen, I got the shock of my life. Despite having watched the film many, many times, I had somehow forgotten that I was actually in it.
Was I overawed by the occasion? Perhaps. But, more than that, I think I was suddenly aware that this was a film about fashion, and that didn’t compute. Ordinarily, I would never expect to be in a fashion film unless I’d accidentally strolled into the back of a shot.
You see, fashion films are not my natural arena. I might fleetingly enjoy watching one for a hit of fantasy, but I am very aware that – although they are almost always billed as documentaries – they do not ordinarily go there, as far as the reality of the industry is concerned.
Instead, from Dior and I to Valentino: The Last Emperor and Diana Vreeland: The Eye Has to Travel, they major in wide-eyed escapism, typically exploring the obsessional aesthete, and full of tropes such as voyeuristic, indecently long shots. This is the lens through which we’ve become accustomed to following tales of haute couture and general fabulousness.
The True Cost, on the other hand, is a fashion documentary that goes there and then some – it unravels the grim, gritty, global supply chain of fast fashion: a system that has injected the type of speed, disposability and price deflation that has directly led to the worst casualties in the industrial age. On our watch.
To be fair, the bulk of the reviews were extraordinarily appreciative of Morgan’s brilliant film. Harvey Weinstein announced at the first LA screening: “This movie’s going to shock the fashion world” – and it will. Reviewing The True cost, the New York Times said: “Under the gentle, humane investigations of its director, what emerges most strongly is a portrait of exploitation that ought to make us more nauseated than elated over those $20 jeans.”
But some of the reactions have suggested to me that – although it’s often proclaimed that fashion and film are trapped in a love affair (another trope) – unless the films are hagiographical, the two industries do not seem such easy bedfellows.
Some I have spoken to in the fashion industry found the impact of watching The True Cost overwhelming, and they reported experiencing a type of moral whiplash. Then there was that defensive whaddaya-want-me-to-do-about-it? reaction, coming from the fact that solving the problem has no straightforward answers, and Morgan purposefully does not present any. “I’m probably most proud that we avoided easy answers and instead chose to trust people to both feel and think deeply about the issues raised,” he says.
Morgan is actually much more charitable than me about the genre he’s ended up involved with. “I’m actually fascinated by those [fashion] films that follow one person,” he tells me from his home in LA. “The best that have been made recently tap into that fascination and give us a glimpse behind the curtain.”
But the director is also a fashion outsider. A father of four, Morgan was moved to investigate fashion’s dark heart when he glimpsed a newspaper photograph of two young boys – the same age as his sons – searching futilely for their mother after the Rana Plaza catastrophe, in April 2013. He was astonished to find out that his non-remarkable clothes could be a product of this fashion system.
Morgan says making The True Cost has changed his life – not least because of the terrifying moments when he and his producer, Michael Ross, were held at gun point and cornered by riot police in some of the 13 countries they travelled through to get the story. It has also made a difference to the pair because they have joined the dots between fashion, consumerism, capitalism and structural poverty and oppression, and will never shop in the same way again.
So, how should you handle a film such as The True Cost? Here, I actually think traditional fashion films have taught us something. We should watch as we’d watch those same reverent biographies: let the story absorb you, transport you and take you under. Engaging with the ugly side of fashion will lead to changing it.
The True Cost is available globally online, via truecostmovie.com, iTunes and Amazon, and in select theatres (at the Bloomsbury Curzon until 5 June).
Graduate fashion week (GFW) finished on Tuesday evening with a gala catwalk show crowning the recipient of this year’s gold award. Hannah Wallace, from Manchester School of Art, was named the winner for her edgy but wearable ski-influenced collection featuring oversized padded jackets and logoed sportswear. Her prize is £10,000. Previous winners of the GFW gold award include revered designers Matthew Williamson, CEO and creative director of Burberry Christopher Bailey, Stella McCartney and Giles Deacon.
The front row at east London’s Old Truman Brewery, where the event took place, included style blogger Bip Ling, and Suzy Menkes, international editor of Vogue. They watched as florals and boxy sportswear emerged as trends, with an influence from music culture ranging from reggae to hip-hop. Students from the University of Brighton to the University of Salford also showcased their collections.
Other award-winners included Melissa Villevieille from Edinburgh College of Art, who won the catwalk textile award and the womenswear award, and Ella Nisbett from Nottingham Trent, who won the Stuart Peters visionary knitwear award and the menswear award.
Judges included Julien MacDonald, a former gold award winner, and television presenter Gok Wan. Both were keen to praise the event as a showcase of new talent – and put it at the forefront of the industry. “GFW is one of the most important dates in the global fashion calendar,” said Wan. “Not only does it promote emerging talent, but it also acts as a source of inspiration for current leading fashion designers.” MacDonald echoed Wan’s sentiment, adding: “These are the designers of the future – the next Alexander McQueen.”
The hugely respected MA courses at Central Saint Martins and the Royal College of Art are likely to be the source the next intake of own-label designers on the London fashion week (LFW) catwalk. But events such as GFW allow the spotlight to fall on universities outside London, and move the focus away from the world of high fashion to the rest of the industry – where the majority of fashion graduates work.
Winner Wallace’s work has a notable edge, and other eccentric elements included animal heads from Maria Philippou, and Poppy Russell’s ode to northern soul, which came complete with dancers.
More commercial collections came in the form of Nisbett’s and pretty vine prints from Georgie Wood, of the University of Salford. This reflects the fact that many of the 1,000 graduates involved will be recruited to the design teams of high-street brands rather than setting up their own labels. Boohoo.com and River Island were both recruiting at the event.
Running across a long weekend, the 24th edition of GFW included 23 BA shows and had contributions from 40 UK universities. Unlike LFW, the event is open to the public, with show tickets available for between £11 and £35. The multi-focused event combined vocational advice with fashion entertainment, plus talks between industry figures such as V&A curator Claire Wilcox and model Erin O’Connor, live photoshoots, and the chance to see a 3D printer in action. Nearly 30,000 visitors came through the doors.
Fashion’s pledge to embrace diversity continues with news that IMG, the major model agency that counts Karlie Kloss and Gigi Hadid on its books, has signed a transgender woman to its international roster.
Hari Nef, 22, is often described as a model/actress/writer but last year walked her first womenswear shows. In spring this year, she opened New York fashion week on the VFiles catwalk wearing a “girl power” hoodie and walked for Hood By Air. While Nef is actually IMG’s second transgender signee, the first being Valentijn De Hingh, Nef is the only one signed globally (De Hingh is only represented by the Paris branch). “I can’t verbalise how thrilled I am to be joining the @imgmodels family,” Nef announced on her Instagram.
A graduate of Columbia NYU, Nef’s agency signing marks yet another interesting shift in the industry’s agenda. In the last 12 months, transgender model Andreja Pejic, 23, underwent sex reassignment surgery, while Lea T became the face (or rather hair) of Redken, marking stepping stone in changing attitudes towards diversity and gender.
Last month, Tess Munster became the first size-24 model to be signed to a mainstream agency, while Stefania Ferrario, the activist model who spearheaded the #droptheplus campaign, was signed to Models 1. Late last year, gay couple Jarlos became the first couple to front a campaign (DKNY).
Nef has never modelled in menswear (she says she is “a lot prettier as a girl”) and according to her IMG agents, is still “in the process of transitioning”. Streetwear label Hood By Air tends to lean towards diversity, but as Nef recently explained the fashion industry remains relatively slow on the diversity uptake. But with her signing, fashion’s relationship diversity looks set to change from tokenistic move and more towards the norm.
Two veteran rag trade brothers who came out of retirement to help turn around the fortunes of Marks & Spencer’s clothing business delivered as much as £72m to the bottom line last year.
Neal and Mark Lindsey, 65 and 62, were hardly mentioned when M&S’s chief executive, Marc Bolland, this week triumphantly unveiled the company’s first annual rise in profits in four years.
Recruited last year with the offer of a three-year contract – under which, according to industry gossips, they stand to earn millions of pounds a year – the brothers have been shaking up the way M&S buys and makes its clothing.
The two multimillionaire Londoners are described by fellow fashion industry insiders as charismatic hard men who know the international network of clothing suppliers from top to bottom. Now based in Hong Kong, although they retain homes in the UK, they’re friends with celebrity businessmen such as the Topshop boss Philip Green and Richard Caring, owner of a string of restaurants and private clubs including the Ivy, who also started out supplying clothing to the high street.
Unlike those two, however, who are frequently been photographed and have seen their business lives scrutinised, the Lindseys have stayed out of the limelight.
“They don’t fit the normal executive format. They have been successful because they are gamblers,” says one industry insider. “But they have always lived a colourful lifestyle. Both live life at 100 miles an hour.”
“They were party animals, two chippy guys from London,” says another industry veteran who knew the Lindseys in the 1980s.
The Lindseys are best known for helping M&S’s rival Next become more efficient in the way it buys clothing. Their efforts helped build Next into a far more profitable business than M&S, despite the latter ringing up more than twice the level of sales each year.
Those who know them say the Lindsays learned their trade working Saturdays and school holidays in their uncle’s menswear store in Golders Green in the 1960s.
Both then moved on to work for Rael Brook, a shirtmaker then in its heyday, and in the late 1960s they began importing from Hong Kong and India under the brand Southern Comfort.
In 1975 they started Nashville Fashionwear, a joint venture with Raybeck, a clothing manufacturer and retailer which at one point owned 300 stores including the Lord John and Berkertex chains.
The pair helped Raybeck move into menswear and built up a formidable range of contacts with overseas manufacturers. The business made own-label clothing for high street retailers including the Burton Group, which then owned Debenhams and Topshop, as well as their own Nashville brand.
They spied the potential business opportunity in making clothing where materials and labour were far cheaper than the UK, and in the mid-1970s the pair moved to Hong Kong to mastermind operations from there. 
“It was an exciting time in the industry and they were among the big boys, stars among it all,” says one industry source. “They were famous for their fantastic parties.”
Neal is tall and slim while his brother Mark is shorter and broader. “They’re known in the industry as the Mitchell brothers,” says one former colleague, referring to the characters from soap opera EastEnders.
In an 1989 interview with the trade journal Men’s Wear, Neal explained their relationship. “We have always worked together and I think the people that know us, whether they like us or not, will recognise that our relationship is the strength of our business. Because we’re brothers, there’s a lot we don’t have to say to each other because we both know what the other is thinking. And, of course, we both have total trust, which is a big help in a partnership.”
Having built a reputation with Nashville, the pair were approached by Richard Caring to help set up a sourcing operation for Next in “near east” countries including Turkey, Romania and Sri Lanka. Nashville merged into Caring’s ICD Group, and the Lindseys ran and co-owned the business, known as NV Production, with Neal living in Sri Lankaand Mark based in Romania.
In 2002 Caring and the Lindseys, who owned just under half of NV, sold out to Next and the Lindseys stayed on to work directly for the retailer. The business was merged with Next’s far east buying operation to become Next Near East in 2005 and the brothers ran the whole show until they retired in 2005. They were set to put their feet up before being approached by Marks & Spencer.
“They will make millions if they get the sourcing right. I don’t think they would have come out of retirement otherwise. They are already very wealthy guys,” says one friend.
They will be rewarded for every point of extra profit margin they can secure for M&S, and so far it is going well.
M&S’ gross profit on its clothing and homewares business rose by £24m last year as margin gains compensated for a 2.5% fall in sales. There was a 1.9 percentage point rise in gross margins on clothing and homewares, and M&S credited 1.8 percentage points of that gain to cutting better deals with suppliers – a figure analysts said was equivalent to about £72m.
One of the UK’s oldest clothing retailers, M&S has been struggling for years to make changes to the way it buys clothing in order to become more profitable. While Bolland has tried to emphasise that a team effort is behind the recent changes, industry experts insist the recent improvement is largely down to the Lindsey brothers.
“They know what they are doing and have enormous range of contacts. M&S has never got hold of its supply chain. They have too much history with big UK organisations with big UK overheads. M&S needed someone without that history or emotional attachment,” says one industry source who knows the Lindseys well.
Some long-term M&S partners, including Dewhirst and Courtaulds, are among a string of suppliers who have lost business or seen their profit margins squeezed as the Lindseys renegotiate terms. Israeli suit manufacturer Bagir Group was forced to issue a profits warning after M&S cut orders in May last year. The Lindseys have torn up relationships that have lasted decades and helped implement a new way of working in which more clothing is designed in-house.
Until recently, M&S had only a handful of its own designers, instead using “full service” suppliers who would present a range of different fashions for M&S buyers to choose from. Now there are 130 in-house design staff and another 30 freelancers. That is giving the retailer more control over the fashions it sells and more freedom to find the best deals with suppliers.
In 2013 M&S bought a fifth of its clothing directly from suppliers; now it is about 35%, and the company intends to increase that proportion to 60% by 2017.
Industry sources report that the Lindseys have introduced an auction system for some basic clothing lines, asking a number of different suppliers to offer their best price on each item. Some rivals suggest that the change of approach, moving away from long-established supplier relationships, carries the risk that M&S will lose the high ethical and sustainability standards that it has built its reputation on.
But an insider said M&S would not take big risks with that reputation, even if it did offer bigger profits. “Regardless of the agenda on margin, someone is going to make sure they don’t give [on ethical standards]. M&S’s reputation is massive, I’m not sure they would take that risk.”
The handbags will still be python, the cotton silky, the leather soft, the designs au courant and the prices steep. In an international marketplace for fashion and luxury lifestyle, citizen-shoppers would have it no other way.
But last week, the global fashion giant Kering Group, owner of brands such as Alexander McQueen, Saint Laurent, Gucci and Stella McCartney, published a groundbreaking report that seeks to grapple with an issue that hangs over the fashion industry: how to weave sustainability into a business that often appears predicated on whim and superficiality.
An exaggerated, three-year effort in brand greenwashing designed to win competitive advantage in an industry fraught with overproduction, supply-side challenges and weak consumer demand, or a sign of a billionaire owner’s genuine commitment to sustainability and care for the environment?
It’s always possible to do two things simultaneously, of course, but the publication of Kering’s Environment Profit & Loss account – EP&L – is nevertheless a bold first for the industry.
The Kering chairman and chief executive, François-Henri Pinault, said he recognised that as part of the textile industry – “one of the most polluting industries in the world”– his company and those like it needed to share knowledge to create more sustainable business models. “Sustainable business is smart business,” he told Women’s Wear Daily. The report will “help us ultimately become a more robust and resilient business”.
The company says it studied 578 processes involving 107 materials in 126 countries to understand the damage caused by its businesses, and those of its suppliers.
Kering valued its use of natural capital – “the stock of natural ecosystems on Earth including air, land, soil, biodiversity and geological resources” – at €773m in 2013.
Leading the list of environmentally damaging practices is the production of leather, linked to the destruction of forestry and use of heavy metals, and cotton, which is hugely demanding of water. Kering’s EP&L estimates that leather alone accounts for 25% of its environmental impact, while 17% is linked to cotton.
Overall, Kering announced, supply-side damage stands at 93% of the total. Only 7% of impact comes from its own operations in shops, offices or warehouses.
In a rare interview last year, Pinault rejected the inference that Kering was simply greenwashing in the pursuit of market-share, saying his goal was not “a question of consumption, but rather consuming differently … We will get to a time when consumption will be clean.”
High ideals, certainly, but with the fashion industry locked into accelerating and seemingly unjustifiable cycles of production, curbing its use of natural resources toward genuine sustainability can seem far-fetched. Still, Pinault has been looking to get ahead of the fashion industry on the issue.
“We don’t integrate sustainability to communicate to clients,” says Marie-Claire Daveu, chief sustainability officer and head of international institutional affairs at Kering. “We do it because we believe sustainability is inherent to quality.”
Efforts toward sustainability frequently flounder, in part because the costs are too great except at the high end. Reforming production, whether for the high or mass-market end of the industry, begins with a thorough review, says Daveu: “If you want to implement concrete action, you have to know exactly where you are. It depends on the product, but everyone in the textile sector is able to implement sustainable action.”
So how far has Kering come? Gucci boasts of bamboo handbags made of leather tanned in a way that uses less water and no heavy metals. The Italian house turns leather cuttings – more than 200 tons in 2013 – into fertiliser, and has developed its own python farm in south-east Asia.
Last year, Kering ordered 55 kilos of certified Fairmined gold from Peru, and Stella McCartney promotes use of wool from sheep farms on Patagonian grasslands. The firm recently joined the Swedish fast-fashion chain H&M to test a new recycling technology that separates and extracts polyester and cotton from used garments to create new textiles.
Kering executives say they hope the assessment will help the company to make better production decisions that will ultimately filter down to mass-market or fast-fashion brands. “The journey is not the same but you can still see where your impact is and where to implement best practices,” says Daveu.
Executives say there is no eco-conversion story for Pinault to relate but his convictions are plain and deep. “If we wait for governments to solve the environmental crisis, not much will happen,” he told Women’s Wear Daily last year. “It is up to us to show initiative, to be extremely proactive and to go beyond simple compliance rules.”
Though Kering does not break down its environmental consequences by brand, it estimates that it is 40% more efficient in terms of natural capital than competitors. Since rivals such as LVMH have not produced a similar report, there is little to judge it against.
For corporate leaders to get out ahead on social issues – aka “corporate responsibility initiatives” – is also good business practice given the volume, ubiquity and lack of differentiation in luxury goods.
Pinault and his wife, the actress Salma Hayek, are clearly looking to establish the company as a socially and environmentally conscientious luxury powerhouse.
Last year, Pinault joined the protest against the Brunei-owned Dorchester hotel in London over punishments for homosexuality in the sultanate. Last week at the Cannes film festival, Pinault sponsored a discussion on the uneven role of women in film, and Kering sued the Asian e-commerce giant Alibaba over sales of counterfeit goods.
A week earlier, the Pinault-owned auction house Christie’s broke records when it sold the Picasso masterpiece Les Femmes d’Alger for $180m, reportedly to the former Qatari prime minister Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber al-Thani.
Christie’s overall take for the week – more than $1bn – and its generous use of guarantees offered to sellers drew speculation that Pinault was positioning it for sale. “You can view Christie’s as an interesting and amusing business to be involved in,” says one knowledgeable market watcher. “Or you’re grabbing market share at the expense of profits to ready it for sale – and sharpen up your business practice later.”
In both cases – Christie’s and Kering – Pinault is garnering headlines.
Climate change suggests that companies such as Kering need to get ahead of the issue or see their production falter in chasing scarce raw materials on a stressed planet. It’s not just a question of customers – or citizens, as Daveu prefers to think of them: the kind of employees Kering competes to hire are increasingly asking questions about sustainability.
Consumers may not want to be beaten over the head about sustainability when they are shopping for a handbag, but they want to know that it’s integral. “It’s important to show you can have beautiful, sexy, high-quality products that at the same time can take care of the planet,” Daveu says. “Every day it’s a challenge. It’s a long journey. We don’t always have the answers or know how to do it, but we have to try step by step to become more sustainable.”
When Angelica Cheung became the first editor of Vogue China 10 years ago, she learned the hard way what the elite fashion world thought of Beijing.
Photographers, designers and models turned down requests to do shoots in a country that is now probably the world’s biggest single market for luxury goods, but was then seen as a crass backwater.
“You thought being Vogue they would automatically want to work for you, and you realised no, because people didn’t know you, they were sceptical about China,” she said with a rueful smile.
“People thought China, to use a crude phrase, would be full of ‘new money’ peasants.”
Critics claimed the country had neither the money nor taste to make Vogue successful. But by the time her bumper first issue went to its third reprint, they had been silenced by Cheung’s vision of a magazine made to international standards just for Chinese tastes.
She did not just want to bring high fashion to China, but also to demand that the industry elite respect the needs of Chinese readers rather than peddling them hackneyed stereotypes of oriental mystique or transplanted western ideals.
Cheung has always been a strong advocate of Chinese photographers, designers and other creatives, but, particularly in the early years when the domestic fashion industry was still finding its feet, needed foreign talent on board to make a Vogue that matched international standards.
Coaxing famous names to come and work with her, then insisting their much-celebrated creative instincts were a bit off, was not a task for the faint-hearted.
“We started battling in a very nice way, you had to be careful not to scare them off ...[I was] changing their point of view about China in a very respectful way,” said Cheung, whose trademark asymmetrical bob has subversive echoes of US Vogue supremo Anna Wintour.
She challenged, as diplomatically as possible, everything from a preference for “cheongsam”-style traditional clothes that “our readers’ grandmothers would wear”, to a moody tone that was off-putting in a country just emerging from decades of deprivation.
“They wanted to dress the models in ‘exotic’ costumes, and then they wanted to shoot them in some ‘ancient’ location,” said Cheung. “They tend to go for the moody, dark, artistic, and sometimes I have to fight and say that is too European.”
“The Chinese will think, ‘Why do I want to be that beauty, it’s not even beautiful? Look at that woman, that woman looks sick, that woman looks downbeat, that woman looks like she is going to commit suicide soon. Why would I want to become that woman?’”
She also had to fight to put Chinese models at the heart of her magazine. “The difficulty was, to be honest, the photographers did not want to shoot Chinese models. That was 10 years ago,” adds Cheung.
“First they were not famous,” she explains. More disturbingly, some photographers struggled to celebrate Chinese beauty. “Creatively, professionally, they didn’t have a feel for them, they had never worked with them, they never shot Chinese models, so genuinely they did not have a feel for how to make them more beautiful.”
Cheung decided the best way to resolve this was by making China firmly mainstream. “We needed a Chinese supermodel,” she said, and set about creating one, pushing homegrown talent with simple deals: ‘If you want to shoot this international supermodel, you also have to do a shoot with Du Juan.’”
Du went on to become hugely famous in her own right, her star rising along with Vogue China’s. The magazine is now one of the biggest in the world, more than twice the size of its UK sister and so popular with advertisers and the country’s moneyed and aspirational classes that they have added 12 supplements a year to the monthly magazines.
“Everyone can see we are so successful, there is a big market and if you want a foot in China you have to work with us,” said Cheung, now preparing for a bumper 10th anniversary edition in September, which will go out to around 1.4 million readers in print and online.
She drew in her original audience by running the magazine almost like a fashion text book for its first few years. Articles about 60s fashion meant nothing to readers whose main point of reference for that decade and the next one was the Mao suit.
“We had to catch our readers up on the last 50 years of fashion,” she said. “What does ‘inspired by the 1980s, inspired by the 1940s mean ... who was Marie Antoinette? Even our own editors had to study, they didn’t know everything.”
She ditched the Vogue rulebook again after her daughter Hayley was born eight years ago and she started to think about the type of woman she wanted her to become.
“I painted a great picture of a stylish woman in the magazine, but that woman doesn’t have a soul,” Cheung says.
She brought in an “Attitudes” section, to showcase women’s work and character, and boost circulation among women who might not find time for a pure fashion fix every month. “Suddenly the magazine had a heart,” she says. “Vogue China readers are mostly working women, dressing is only a small part of their lives, so I have to capture the other parts.”
Cheung is as multifaceted as her target reader, as happy talking about her love for Arsenal as discussing her favourite Chinese designers and models. Before becoming a mother she would stay up until the small hours to watch British football matches in dingy Beijing sports bars, almost certainly the only person there who could analyse the success of both David and Victoria Beckham.
She won the battle for the heart of her magazine but is still fighting for the rest of the global fashion world to see her country as a source of inspiration, rather than just a giant storefront, and ditch the lingering cliche of Chinese as brand-hungry but otherwise indiscriminate shoppers.
The country’s sometimes strange and often mocked fashion trends of the 1990s and 2000s were born of the tumult of choice suddenly offered to people whose clothes had been as narrowly defined by the state as their job and marriage prospects, not any inherent lack of taste, she says.
“Not enough people come to understand contemporary China ... [for them] there is always somewhere else more important than the country that makes up 50% of their business,” she says.
“They create advertising campaigns that cost millions of dollars but antagonise and confuse the customers.”
Some of that patchy understanding was on display at this year’s Met Gala, sometimes dubbed fashion’s Oscars, where the theme of the evening and an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art was “China: Through the Looking Glass”.
Along with a string of Chinese celebrities and designers, there were also plenty of the old cliches on display when guests arrived in dresses that owed more to Japanese than Chinese tradition, or were apparently inspired only by vague western fantasies of “the Orient”.
But Cheung, who helped to organise the museum show and chronicled the glittering ball on Instagram, said the evening had been a rare chance to get people talking about Chinese fashion.
“If you complain every time people do something, [saying] ‘this is done wrong, we in China are not like that’, then nobody does anything,” she said. “At least they created more awareness about China. I try to look at the positive side of things. It’s better than nobody giving a damn about anything Chinese ... But is that the only image that I want people to see of China? No.”
In Metis’s previous piece, 3rd Ring Out, east London was underwater as a consequence of climate change and the audience had to decide what to do next. Would altruism win out over self- interest, or local claims over global needs? Yep, we failed to save the world. There’s likely to be a similar sense of helpless failure if you take part in this clever company’s latest theatre game, which looks at the effects of the fashion industry on those living far away, casting the audience as owners of a Chinese clothing factory.
Each table in the theatre represents a single factory, and after an introduction in which we find out a little about the UK’s declining manufacturing industry and the rise of the far east as a major player, each table is given a wad of (fake) money and a chance to make our fortune. Margaret Thatcher’s maxim that people want growth, not equality, rings in our ears. But when hearing about the lives of 21st-century Chinese factory workers, it’s hard not to think of Friedrich Engels’ appalled descriptions of the working classes in mid-19th-century industrial Manchester.
Beautifully facilitated by a cast of four, who act like croupiers, dealing each table a new card with a developing scenario and a binary choice, the show is like a speedily played boardgame. Yes, there’s a lack of nuance in the choices offered, and the breakneck speed at which the scenario unfolds doesn’t really allow for reasoned discussion. It sometimes all feels a little earnest and lacks a sense of drama. But it’s sociable, exhaustingly good fun and it would work particularly well with young people, as it clearly connects actions to consequences, and tots up the real cost of cheap clothes in the high street – both to people and the planet.
For the journalist used to the Gatwick Express and EasyJet, delivery into the lavish embrace of Prada is somewhat disconcerting. “I could get used to this,” you think, even as you worry that your shoes are all wrong, that your bag will fool no one, being neither new season nor vintage. At the 18th-century palazzo of the Fondazione Prada (its address is Ca’ Corner della Regina, though only rarely does anyone seem to use it) on the Grand Canal in Venice, no fewer than four black-suited young men are on hand to greet me: one to help me from water taxi to jetty, another to spirit away my luggage, and two merely to smile at me. “Please,” says a PR, leading me through the palazzo’s exquisite rooms (since 2011, these heavenly spaces have been used by the Fondazione Prada to display art). “Do go upstairs, where a buffet lunch will be served.” A buffet? Well, yes, the food is indeed arranged on a table. But when I approach a dish of gleaming asparagus – it’s so perfect, it might as well be by Manet – a waiter practically dives into my lap. If I’d like to sit down, he will bring me everything that I require.
It is the first week of the Venice Biennale. This lunch, doubtless one of dozens of similar gatherings around the city, is to celebrate the opening of Portable Classic, a new show at the palazzo which explores the miniature copies of classical sculptures that were such status symbols in later centuries. Needless to say, it’s a hot ticket. Who doesn’t want to be close to Miuccia Prada, an increasingly powerful figure in the art world?
Loitering, glass in hand, at one end of the room, I spot plenty of big names, Anish Kapoor and Carsten Höller among them – though it’s only when I clap eyes on Hans Ulrich Obrist, the itinerant and irredeemably well-connected curator and co-director of the Serpentine Gallery in London, that I know this is really the place to be. Obrist, of course, is already deep in conversation with our hostess, Mrs Prada – everyone calls her Mrs Prada, even those who have worked with her for decades – who slipped into the palazzo without fanfare a little earlier, and for a while I watch the two of them. While he is animated, arms windmilling wildly, Prada cuts an altogether quieter figure. Small and (unexpectedly) blond, she is wearing a white cotton dress with a pleated skirt. In her hand is a silk drawstring bag. In her ears are antique garnets or, more likely, rubies. On her feet are the kind of flat sandals, navy and white, that your granny wore at the seaside.
Two hours later, as the lunch is winding down and the diamonds and Chanel bags begin to exit the room, Prada approaches me and asks if I wouldn’t mind if we talked here, at one of the dining tables. It seems she has not yet had a chance to eat pudding and, sure enough, a waiter now puts in front of her a dish of panna cotta and roast peaches, an espresso (which she sends back, on the grounds that it is not hot enough) and some sugary biscuits. She eats quickly and greedily, and thanks to this, I warm to her – though it’s her face that really invites you in. Tanned as a nut, she wears no makeup, not even a slick of balm on her lips, while her expression is set somewhere between sombre and quizzical. It’s clear immediately that she couldn’t care less what I’m wearing; her eyes coolly meet mine, and never wander, not even to my (long-pondered and moderately daring) brooch. It’s as if she’s about to give me a tutorial.
In her home city of Milan, the Fondazione Prada has just opened a vast “campus” for art on the site of an old distillery close to a railway line. I saw it the day before, and gasped at its size, its ambition, its severe industrial minimalism (even the children’s play area is grey and white). At 19,000 square metres, its collection of exhibition spaces – one is several storeys high and called the Haunted House, another is a grotto deep underground – is twice the size of Renzo Piano’s new Whitney museum in New York, and at least three times as elegant. Designed by the Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas, and filled mostly with work from the permanent collection of the Fondazione Prada, it has been received with some rapture by the critics, and with some gratitude by the Milanese, who will doubtless continue to make good use of its retro cafe – a 50s fantasy in green vinyl designed by the film director Wes Anderson – irrespective of whether they ultimately fall for the charms of Damien Hirst’s Lost Love (a gynaecologist’s chair in a large aquarium the artist made in 2000) or Nathalie Djurberg’s The Potato (a walk-in fibreglass tuber complete with purplish eyes that dates from 2008).
But is the woman who conceived it triumphant, over the moon, high on a combination of acclaim and relief? No, she is not. Only with the greatest reluctance, it seems, would Prada ever describe herself as pleased. “I’m always thinking about the next thing,” she says, her mouth turning down. “So I don’t enjoy anything.” But it’s so generous, her city of a gallery, with its square, its library, its cinema (visitors will be able to spend the day there for €10). She shrugs. “Well, I don’t feel generous. The result is maybe generous, but I didn’t start with that. I started with an idea, which was to do something that I think is important and relevant. I wanted to make culture attractive to the young [so that they would see] that it is necessary to your life. My intuition – and after many years, I realise that my main quality is intuition – was that it would be good to have a place where people could live with ideas.” Culture, she insists, must come to be perceived not as an extra, as a form of “decoration”, but as deeply useful. In what way useful? “It can answer political and even existential questions.”
She and her husband, Patrizio Bertelli, the chief executive of Prada, established the Fondazione Prada in 1993, and it was only after this, she says, that they began buying art. “We had to learn, and quickly. Until that moment, my cultural background was in literature, politics, cinema, theatre and dance. Art? I was never interested in it.” So who did they buy first? “Nino Franchina [the Italian sculptor and painter] was probably the first… ” She grimaces. “You know, you look and you study and you like it and you appreciate it and eventually you buy it. That’s not very noble, the buying part, but I have to confess it. I grew up with the idea that art is for everybody and not a matter of private ownership, but sometimes you want to have it.”
Happily, she finds she’s now less interested in buying than before: when I tell her, for instance, that the loveliest things I saw during my visit were the two boxes by the American artist Joseph Cornell displayed in a 15th-century marquetry studiolo-cum-sideboard, her reply is unsentimental. “I’d always liked Cornell, but I bought those because I wanted to have something to put into the studiolo,” she says.
Her resistance to – or embarrassment about – the concept of ownership extends to the word “collector”: she and Bertelli may own some 900 pieces of contemporary and modern art, but she flinches if you use the term in her presence. “I hate the idea of being a collector,” she says. “I really hate it. I’m not a collector.” Nor is she willing to be described as a patron, for all that she is well known for commissioning artists (no interview with Prada is complete without mention of the Carsten Höller slide by which she may, if she so chooses, depart her office at night). “As much as I don’t feel like a collector, I’m even less a patron. I am and want to be an active part of shaping culture, but I am patronising nothing. I hate all of that. I don’t want to be perceived like that, which is why we never sponsor exhibitions.” So what is she, then? “When I started becoming friends with the artists, there was a shift. It was like sharing personal problems.”
Crikey. Building galleries and commissioning work is some way to share personal problems, not least because, however she likes to describe it, it brings with it such responsibilities: she has it in her power not only to make or break a career, but to influence the market. Does this ever make her anxious? “I can’t speak about the market,” she says. “But it is a problem in every field: the hunger for the new. In fashion, everyone wants a genius, and in another few days, they want another. It’s really bad. The problem is that people think an artist has only one great period. But we all live longer now: an artist can have a comeback.”
Prada and Bertelli have always strived to keep their fashion business and their interest in art quite separate. I think this has to do with their fear of vulgarity. They would hate anyone to think the Fondazione Prada was simply another, albeit more esoteric, way of selling handbags. But even so, the two realms must influence each other. How could they not? She smiles. “Yes. I prefer that they don’t in principle. But of course they do. I’m very proud of my job [as a designer]. I used to be ashamed of it because I was educated, I was a feminist. But finally, I am proud of it. I earn my own money, which is a huge thing for a woman. The speed of fashion has taught me so much, and it’s a very open world by its nature. Movies, music: we need culture for our job. This speed is useful in the art world, and for sure the art world is useful in my job. It’s such an obvious collaboration, and deep down my life is one. Every man and woman wants to dress well. That’s how they express themselves.”
She can’t believe the snobbery that exists around fashion. “It’s an injustice,” she says. But isn’t it the case that some people also take it far too seriously? It’s only frocks, after all. For a moment, she is silent. Perhaps I’ve offended her. But then she breaks into laughter. “Actually, I don’t care,” she says. “I really don’t care at all!”
In Milan, I went on a pilgrimage – or at least a research trip – to the original Fratelli Prada store in the Galleria Vittorio Emanuele II, which Miuccia’s grandfather, Mario, opened in 1913. Mario made travel goods for the Milanese elite: in 1918, his collection included a lizard bag with marcasite and a buckle of lapis lazuli. But the chief object of interest in his shop’s hallowed windows was not a trunk or even a bag, but a socking great pair of sunglasses made of wood and leather and bolted together with metal staples. Bulky and unwearable, I almost laughed out loud when I saw them. They were so hideous, and yet I longed for them, an unnerving kind of covetousness that Prada has been inducing in customers and window shoppers alike since the early 90s (she inherited the business in 1978, but did not begin making clothes until a decade later). As Giorgio Armani has occasionally complained, her designs are “sometimes ugly”. Nevertheless, in her hands, such “bad taste” is chic. According to Forbes, Prada’s annual sales currently stand at $4.65bn.
She took over at Prada reluctantly. Fashion, business: these weren’t her things at all.
Having earned a doctorate in political science from the University of Milan, in the mid-70s she studied mime at the city’s Piccolo Teatro under the legendary director Giorgio Strehler; she also joined the communist party, whose leaflets she is said to have distributed while wearing Yves Saint Laurent. Even now, she insists it was only thanks to Patrizio – the couple met at a trade fair; at the time, he also had a leather goods business – that she moved from bags into clothes (he told her that if she didn’t do it, he would have to bring in a professional to design a collection). “I really have no idea where it [her determination] comes from,” she says. “Someone once said to me: Miuccia, you are a monster of ambition. But it’s not that. My best quality is my instinct. When people ask: ‘Are you happy it turned out like this?’ I say: ‘Bah! I don’t know. I never had a goal.’ I act and I react. I have a special guide inside me.”
Does she ever doubt her instincts? “So far, I trust it.” Only once has she sent out a collection and thought: uh-oh. “It was many years ago, my third show. I invented vintage. Now, vintage is normal. But then, it wasn’t. WWD [Women’s Wear Daily, the industry bible] wrote that it was like the Flintstones meets the Jacksons, which to them was the biggest insult, but to me was the biggest compliment. Anyway, it was completely unsuccessful.”
Her success, like so many things about her, is paradoxical. “I was never classical enough for the classicists, and never avant-garde enough for the avant-garde. It was always uncomfortable, I always did something wrong.” But she pressed on, and in the end, it was this very wrongness – oh, those ridiculous wooden sunglasses – that came to be acclaimed.
Prada is 66, but she can’t ever see herself giving up fashion; not even the art world could lure her away. “My work keeps me grounded. It’s the place where I really know what people want. Of course, it’s more complicated now. Before, the world was small. Until the 80s, it was mainly white and western and Eurocentric. Now, you have to face the big picture. It’s globalised.” At the Fondazione Prada in Milan, there will soon be a dance programme, and its choreographer would like those who take part to perform naked. “And this is the Hebdo and Houellebecq problem. How can you insist on your own culture if you want to open up to the world? You have to start a kind of censorship. You must compromise. The political correctness of today – in the US, you can’t even show a nipple – I feel very deeply. People take offence so quickly. But if you believe in coexistence, you may have to give up something that’s yours. If you don’t, you may end up back in medieval times.”
I wonder if she feels things are going backwards in other ways. How does a 70s feminist like her feel about the pressure on women to look permanently young and taut? Wouldn’t she like to use her influence to do something about it?
“First of all, I had this problem – worrying about looking old – when I was 33 and thank God I got over it and it never came back. Second, we will arrive there. The world is ageing, so from a commercial point of view, eventually people will start saying: it [being older] is fantastic. You won’t convince people with [older] models, but when each of us really believes in ourselves, and feels good and beautiful and sexy and secure, that will be it. And in any case, if we work who cares? If you don’t work, of course you think about the problem of your wrinkles from morning until night! If you work, you have something better to think about. That is the beginning of every possible kind of pride, and with those women [who don’t work] I really have no conversation.”
Love and work… that’s all there is. Freud, she agrees, was right about this, and the two cannot really be separated. “If you don’t work, if you depend on a man for your bread, how can you be happy? If you are young and blond, maybe he will love an older one with black hair. So just live your life. This is so obvious. I think women can go on having lovers until they are 100.”
Why is it still so hard for women to be the boss? Partly, she believes, this has to do with the issue of children, and whose job it is to look after them (her sons are grown-up now, but she was “privileged” enough for childcare not to have been too much of a problem). But it also connects to something more elusive.
“Women are complex, but command is very simple. Maybe that’s it. Also, as a woman, sometimes you want to be weak. It’s almost a pleasure. It comes from your traditional past. We interiorise sweetness, delicacy, protection: all those qualities of women. Why can’t we say we are clever? There is something wrong.”
Will a jacket or a dress change your life? She laughs out loud at this idea. “I can tell you that it won’t,” she says.
All the same, it strikes me as rather odd – or perhaps I just mean unfair – that the woman, arty and bookish, Prada seems to have in mind when she designs is also the kind of person who, in reality, would be least likely to be able afford her clothes. What are her more impoverished fans (I’m not saying I’m among them, or not out loud) supposed to do? She thinks for a moment. “I don’t know what to say. It is undemocratic. If you can afford it, you can, and if you can’t, you can’t. I would say: wear vintage. I would say: be strong and proud. Look chic with something less expensive. When I struggle, I feel good because I am not passive.”
Life, she thinks, is about ideas not jackets – though this is easy for her to say. When she gets up to leave, I notice her sandals all over again, and though she is irrefutably wearing the shoes of a Scarborough landlady dressed for best, it’s finest Venetian terrazzo over which she scoots, not a flowery fitted carpet.
Serial Classic, Fondazione Prada, Milan, until 24 August, and Portable Classic is at the Fondazione Prada, Venice, until 13 September, fondazioneprada.org
A new book featuring images of Coco Chanel by the photographer Douglas Kirkland provides a unique insight into the woman who transformed fashion. Sent to Paris on assignment for Look magazine in 1962, Kirkland ended up living with Chanel for three weeks, and captured her as never before
All images from: Coco Chanel: Three Weeks/1962 by Douglas Kirkland, © 2008, published by Glitterati
When we heard that filmmaker Alison Chernick had made a biopic about Martin Margiela, launching at the Tribeca film festival and now online, we were excited. The cult designer has never been photographed in public, and never once taken a catwalk bow. No one outside his inner circle knows what he looks like, beyond one grainy and unverified picture on Google Images. Finally, we’d get to see the real Margiela!
Well, actually, we don’t. (The clue is in the title.) Although this documentary was made with the full support of Margiela, he never appears in it. (We do get one nugget: Jean Paul Gaultier, whom Margiela assisted earlier in his career, tells us that “Martin is very tall”.) So, how do you make a biopic about a man who has never appeared on camera?
You do it the Margiela way, that’s how. Margiela is about fashion and design in its purest form: no glamour, no image, no ego. In an industry where superstar designers are the norm, he insisted on working collaboratively with his teams. He made collections, which became the hot tickets of Paris fashion week, out of plastic carrier bags and wire coat hangers. He never booked celebrity models, and often covered his models’ faces in hoods.
The result is a 12-minute film which may not show us Margiela, but gives a real sense of the man. You get to see his awesome “collaborators”, the coolest talking-heads ever, who wear black and chain-smoke in the rain while talking about how Margiela subverted the media-circus of fashion and “forced you to look at the clothes”. You get to hear Suzy Menkes talking about the “Greta Garbo of fashion”, footage of his packed-out early fashion shows, and of make-up artists obscuring models’ faces backstage with black paint on decorator’s brushes. Apparently Chernick, who had found some early footage of Margiela with Jean Paul Gaultier, was disappointed when this was vetoed. But as fashion historian Olivier Saillard says in the film, Margiela “proved that you could make things out of nothing, and that’s a very comforting idea for the world”. An anonymous biopic: what could be more Margiela than that?
The Artist is Absent is the first documentary produced by Yoox Group, the internet shopping portal that in March announced its merger with Net a Porter.
A report released last week claimed that job interview outfits can seriously boost a candidate’s chances of success (in the study, the applicant who wore a Louis Vuitton logo on their top was deemed most employable). Here, nine people who hire and fire in fashion – and know their sartorial semantics – reveal their interview bugbears:
Generally, my advice would be to always mirror the interviewer as closely possible based on what you know about the culture of the business and people working there.
For the luxury and lifestyle clients we work with, a full suit is rarely appropriate. However, you need to turn down the informality a degree and create a balance based on the range of people you will meet in the interview (the HR manager may dress very differently to the marketing director).
The detail is crucial – neat, clean, interesting enough to build your personality around. Too bland is too bland and anything too obviously fashion or edgy will distract from what you’re saying. Absolute no-nos include sunglasses on the head during an interview, skyscraper heels if you can’t walk effortlessly in them, noisy jewellery and dirty shoes. The interviewer should be able to visually picture you doing the job you’re interviewing for.
In the communications industry, meticulous personal grooming is incredibly important. When a candidate is well-presented it shows an organised mind, as well as a thoughtfulness and awareness of what is appropriate. It’s not a suit-and-tie industry, so there are few hard-and-fast rules. I wouldn’t rule out someone because they were in sneakers, but they couldn’t be ancient dog-walking ones.
But I am not at all impressed by an obvious logo on an interviewee. A logo shouts louder than the person wearing it; I would rather they showed off their personality and skills. Once someone’s got the job, it’s different – I love seeing one of my team in an amazing piece they’ve hunted down because I want to know that my team are in touch and that fashion is important to them. But not in the interview.
When I was interviewing for my current PA, I was eventually deciding between two candidates, and I was leaning toward the one with the incredible Saint Laurent jacket and the fabulously groomed eyebrows. But my PA who was leaving told me to go with the other candidate instead, who would do the job better, and she was totally right. The moral of the story is: don’t get distracted by the eyebrows.
Nobody (boys or girls) can get away with short shorts in an interview and very noisy jewellery puts me off (very jangly bangles)!
I’m so scruffy myself that I like to think I’d rise above all that, but the truth is I’d probably find it pretty off-putting if someone was trying way too hard to be fashionable. A friend of mine once went for an interview on a fashion mag wearing a turban (bear with me, it was the late 80s). It wasn’t her at all, she was just wearing what she thought they’d like. Ten minutes in, the editor put up her hand and said: “I’m sorry, there’s no point continuing with this, I just know you won’t fit in here …” There’s a lesson in there somewhere.
What you wear to work matters. In any industry, but especially when you work in fashion. It doesn’t matter how much you earn, some of my favourite things have been bought in Oxfam. Especially the Notting Hill branch (tip).
What you wear to go out on a Friday night does not translate on a Wednesday morning. I once interviewed a girl whose blouse was open so low her breasts were on show for the world to see. I was so distracted I forgot my usual, relevant questions and instead asked: “Who is your favourite Spice Girl?” (actually quite important) and: “How many leopard-print items of clothing do you own?”
We all judge a book by its cover, and first impressions are so important. No one is taking a candidate seriously in a bad outfit. Not their colleagues and definitely not their boss.
In terms of image, I always prefer a candidate more formally than casually presented. Overstyling in hair or accessories – be it a big blowout or skyscraper heels – don’t impress and can give the wrong impression. Avoid logos completely and go for hair tied back and a crisp white shirt, and let your personality and skills do the talking.
The two things that stand out that have put me off hiring someone were chipped and very badly bitten nails and very orange, streaky fake tan. Overall, if someone is applying to work represent any brand, you would expect them to be well turned out and a reflection of your company values.
I would never judge a candidate by what they were wearing, it’s all about their skillset and personality. As a fashion person, you can never fail to notice someone’s handbag – it always catches your eye, as it would if they were on the tube – but it wouldn’t sway me.Fashion is an industry where individual style is celebrated, but perhaps in other types of job interviews I would advise dressing comfortably above all else. You won’t perform if you aren’t relaxed. And I’d advise mid-height heels that you can run up stairs in – more than anything, you don’t want to be late.
It matters less what individuals are wearing, more the thought they have put into it to make a good impression – and that they are at ease in what they have chosen to wear.
How do we talk about obesity when it is simultaneously a rocketing health crisis and the subject of documentaries about how fat women (it’s always women) can be fabulous too? As an average woman, I see the standard imagery of the fashion industry with its thin limbs and smooth skin as a silent daily reminder that I have not attained the arbitrary target. I don’t fit it, and it doesn’t fit me. So the current boom in plus-sized fashion should be cause for celebration. But there’s celebration and then there’s donning blinkers to all the downsides. The producers of Plus Sized Wars (Channel 4) focus on the UK’s biggest plus-sized brands, Evans and Yours and Australian newcomer Taking Shape, which was slammed last year for setting up a “skinny bird-watching” hide at London fashion week as a publicity stunt.
This documentary was originally called the rather more patronising Fat & Fabulous but someone in an upstairs office at Channel 4 clearly decided that the addition of conflict (no war was evident here at all) might spice up the ratings.
To the sound of All About That Bass by Megan Trainor (more thought could have gone into that decision), some plus-sized fashion bloggers try on dresses at an Evans event to launch their new, younger-skewed collection.
The “original fat shop” as the voiceover delightfully describes it, is desperate to plug into the social media word-of-mouth buzz created by these self-made heroines with a collective following of over half a million fans on Instagram.
“They’re tearing up the plump and lovely rule book,” smarms the voiceover, as it becomes obvious their posed selfies in cute outfits have far more influence than any billboard or bus advert ever could. No wonder they’re being courted and fought over by marketing mavens who suddenly see money where before they wouldn’t have seen them at all. The reaction of the producers here feels similar. Now these women are seen as legitimate documentary fodder, television seems almost desperate not to offend them. To the point where they use words like “plump and lovely”. Yeesh.
Next we meet the embodiment of the fashion industry in one woman, Anna Shillinglaw, the owner of Milk model agency which has a plus-sized list. And when she says plus-sized, she means 14 to 16, in proportion, no bulges with a flat stomach. Ground broken, box ticked. She teams up with the Sun newspaper to find Britain’s next top plus-sized model. We listen to her and the panel dismiss one girl’s picture after another for their perceived flaws. This one is “too short”. This one could have “po-tench?” queries her fellow judge over another. “Po-tench,” Shillinglaw agrees, putting the picture to one side.
And of the next, “I think her nose is a little bit wide for photography”. This with a straight face before dumping it on the failure pile. Even in a plus size world, your nose can be literally too fat for fashion.
Over at rival brand Yours, owner Andrew Killingsworth is thinking even bigger and plans to book US phenomenon Tess Holliday (AKA Tess Munster) for his company’s latest lingerie campaign. She is a size-24 bombshell with an astonishing face: one of those people your eyes involuntarily strain for like a cartoon coyote’s. It’s only weeks after Tess’s arrival in the UK, surrounded by media fuss, that Shillinglaw suddenly remembers she too has “always” been looking for a really big model to sign to her books and jumps on the bandwagon faster than you can say: “I want a piece of that.” Holliday naturally has more than half a million Instagram followers which, Shillinglaw admits, doubles any model’s price without further discussion.
In this slightly confused hour, the autonomy of the young bloggers at least emerges as a positive. They use their powers for good, even if those who would exploit that are quickly hoving into view.
The theme of obesity continued on the other side as the thoroughly enjoyable Back in Time for Dinner concluded on BBC Two. The Robshaw family ended their summer cooking and eating the food of every 20th- century decade, from post-war bread and dripping up to the microwave meals of the millennium, with a final visit from Giles Coren. He offered them a potential vision of the future as the human race searches for new and sustainable ways to feed itself. His conclusion? Insects. Even the agreeably game Robshaws balked at worm tartlets which food historian Polly Russell admitted had “a squeak to them”.
No wonder talks are on for a second series. It was a brilliant combination of nostalgia for the brown and orange decades of so many of our childhoods and bang-on casting. Whoever found this telegenic, likeable and articulate clan did half the work before shooting even began.
The clothing company Benetton has announced it is contributing $1.1m (£740,000) to a compensation fund for the victims of the Rana Plaza disaster, a week before the second anniversary of the Bangladeshi factory building collapse that killed more than 1,100 workers.
It makes the Italian firm the last major western fashion retailer that sourced clothing from the eight-floor building in Dhaka to donate to the fund backed by the UN’s International Labour Organisation. 
However, campaigners are bitterly disappointed that the total remains $8m short of an original $30m target. They had called for Benetton – which promised a donation several weeks ago – to make up the entire balance.
The company, which initially denied using any firms located in the factory complex, said it was donating double the amount advised by the accountants PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC).
The PwC report calculated the amount brands should contribute to the fund based on the $30m target and their share of production at the factory. Benetton’s share was 1.8%.
The figure was endorsed separately by Worldwide Responsible Accredited Production (WRAP), a US-based NGO specialising in social compliance through global supply chains.
Ineke Zeldenrust, a spokesman for the Clean Clothes Campaign, said: “Benetton had a real opportunity to emerge as a leader and prove that its pledges of empathy, understanding and care for the welfare of the victims were not just some PR spin. Unfortunately, the true colours of Benetton are now revealed.”
Zeldenrust questioned the WRAP report, saying: “WRAP is an industry sponsored social auditing and certification organisation with one of the worst track records in the industry. The Garib and Garib factory, for example, that went up in flames in Dhaka in 2010, was WRAP certified at the time.”
Benetton’s contribution comes after more than 1m people signed a petition on the campaigning site Avaaz calling for the Italian label to donate alongside other western brands linked to the world’s deadliest clothing industry accident.
Avaaz’s campaign director, Dalia Hashad, said: “Benetton is not giving nearly enough to ease the death and suffering their clothes have caused.” 
She said the payment set a precedent for other global brands that had not contributed to the fund, adding: “When workers die, you cannot walk away.”
Benetton said its total contribution was $1.6m as it had also helped the victims via its own support programme in partnership with BRAC, an NGO in Bangladesh. 
The company said it has also agreed to raise working conditions and living standards for workers in the garment industry across its global supply chain. Benetton said it would apply the principles of the Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh to producers in other global markets.
Marco Airoldi, Benetton’s chief executive, said: “While there is no real redress for the tragic loss of life, we hope that this robust and clear mechanism for calculating compensation could be used more widely. For this reason, we decided to make the PwC report publicly available to all stakeholders.”
On the second anniversary of the disaster on 24 April, the Fashion Revolution campaign will encourage consumers in 68 different countries to ask questions about where their clothes are made. In the UK, it is backed by well-known figures such as the model Lily Cole and the ethical fashion supporter Livia Firth.
Mulberry, the luxury handbag maker, has said profits will be better than previously expected after a bounce back in sales.
The Somerset-based company’s sales rose 9% in the six months to 28 March, compared to a fall of 9% in the previous half-year, after it returned to its tradition of more affordable bags. Underlying sales, stripping out the effect of new store openings, rose 7% partly thanks to a 26% surge in turnover online.
“The encouraging retail trends over the last five months reflect our reinvigorated product offer and focus on our customers,” said chairman Godfrey Davis, who took the reins of the group a year ago. “I believe there is evidence of a turning point in our business.”
He said tight control of day-to-day costs would mean profits would be better than expected, after a profits warning in October. Strong retail sales have also offset a slump in wholesale orders which have fallen by about 30%. Davis said wholesale orders have now stopped declining.
Davis will now hand over to Thierry Andretta, the new chief executive, after he returned to an executive role in March last year. He stepped in after the abrupt exit of former chief executive Bruno Guillon whose attempt to take the brand into the super-luxury sphere led to a slump in profits.
Davis introduced the cheaper Tessie collection of bags and a lower-priced version of the brand’s popular Bayswater bag.
There is a fashion that fashion likes to ignore. Here is one of its imaginary clothes rails: a pair of crocheted white shorts, a fringed suedette jacket. Flick, flick. A maxi skirt slashed to the thigh, tops with backs or fronts cut out. Each item costs £20 or less and its main ingredient lies somewhere between 95% viscose and 100% polyester. Fashion’s wardens do not like to acknowledge these clothes, which live mostly in exile from Vogue and the highbrow style magazines. They shadow the wardrobes of celebrities rather than Parisian or London catwalks and the labels carry strange sounding names: Boohoo, Pretty Little Thing, Shelikes, Missguided. These are a new crop of digital fashion brands. Their shopfronts are Facebook, Instagram and Tumblr. They push out looks rather than innovate in design. Yet together they are at the forefront of a revolution in the digital fashion industry – a second wave of fast fashion.
The figures are impressive. Missguided’s turnover has gone from £8m three years ago to £55m for the past financial year. Boohoo’s sales were £50.8m for the four months to December. But these brands don’t come from where you think they do. Far from being faceless multinationals, all four are startups born in Manchester, in the streets still dominated by the architecture of the textile industry. Their founders are the descendents of immigrants who found work in Britain in the rag trade, and stayed in it. Now these entrepreneurs are using the decades-old skills and networks of the textile industry to map the desires of the digital consumer.
Missguided’s office, on an industrial estate on the edge of Salford, is full of empty chairs, soon to be occupied. Growth has been so fast that it employed 253 new people in the first half of last year. Bright and breezy clothes hang on rails – as worn by Nicole Scherzinger (who is a “brand ambassador” for the company, fronting the “Nicole X” range), Ellie Goulding, Fearne Cotton, Little Mix, Katy B and countless others. Walls are pasted with slogans. “Don’t make sense, make dollars.” “Wake up, kick ass, repeat.” Across the boardroom window, giant stickers spell the word L-O-V-E.
“I did the interiors. I’m a very peaceful person,” Nitin Passi says. Passi is Missguided’s 32-year-old founder and chief executive. He is striding through the studio, “the funnest place in the office”, where a model is posing in an outfit of skorts and top that costs £28 all in. “I like to say we’re the quickest,” he says. “If [the high street] are fast fashion, we’re rapid fashion.” “We update our site once a day with new stock,” Passi says, “but in my eyes we should be updating it every hour. If a trend comes, we need to have it on our site in under a week.”
There is a souvenir that Passi keeps, from his first week in business, which is key to this speed. “One of my buying lists. It says: pair of leggings, one size small, one size large.” He bought pieces only once he had an order. Despite its growth, Missguided has retained its agility. Five days after a dress has appeared on a C-list red-carpet event, a jersey remake can be waiting in an online basket. “And we’re going to get quicker,” Passi says. Felipe Caro, a professor at UCLA Anderson School of Management, has spent years studying Zara, which in 2005 was hailed by the Economist as the pioneer of fast fashion. He describes the work of Missguided and Boohoo as “fast fashion on steroids”. At Zara, the journey from drawing board to shop floor is typically around four weeks, Caro says. But Passi claims he “can turn samples around in a day”.
This sounds impressive. So why are these retailers locked out by the gatekeepers of fashion? Why do their clothes never feature in Vogue? “Fashion is a snobby world,” says fashion consultant Melanie Rickey. The only brand out of these four that has crossed her radar is Boohoo. Can she foresee a day when it makes it to the pages of Vogue? “No,” she says. “It is not a fashion brand. It is a cheap retailer of clothes for Saturday night. What would have been a street market.”
The comparison is accurate. The overlap between digital fashion and Manchester’s rag trade heritage is built into Boohoo’s head office, in an old cotton mill. Where Mahmud Kamani’s father bought up property, Kamani and his siblings bought domain names (they paid £10,000 for boohoo.com). Where Kamani’s father hauled his wares around the markets – he sold bags – Kamani and his co-founder Carol Kane have set up stall in the giant virtual marketplace of the internet.
Kamani is sitting at one end of a polished boardroom table, several mobiles before him, diamonds around the rim of his Rolex. Next to him, Kane wears a side plait and a Chanel necklace. They worked together on Pinstripe, a wholesaler owned by Kamani’s father that supplied the giants of the high street – “Topshop, your C&As, your Etams,” says Kane – and their patter has the ring of traders warming their hands on stories of sales past.
“We had lots of winners. Every season something would hit,” says Kane. “The fur gilet…”
“If you walked down the high street, every window had our fur gilets. It was in that much demand,” says Kamani.
“They would have taken whatever we had,” nods Kane.
They have entered a kind of reverie, the two of them, because they chalked up hits as middle men, linking manufacturers to retailers. Then, in 2006, Kane and Kamani realised they could use the internet to connect directly with their consumers. They found that one of the advantages of having your shop window online as opposed to on the street is that your stock has no physical context. No one can see who your neighbours are, or how high you pile it. If the website looks slick, so do the clothes.
“It is old rag trade reinvented, and that is in no way pejorative,” says Lorna Hall, head of market intelligence at fashion forecasting service WGSN. “It’s the second and third generation of the rag trade who have really grasped the digital, seen an opportunity and run with it. Why couldn’t they launch their own business with their products, brand it, give it a name, build it?” She points out that 23% of the prices at Boohoo are in the £5-£9.99 category, compared to only 11% of Asos products. “You start to see who that shopper is they’re targeting.”
“They want to try something in a small way and if it takes off, work out how to produce more of it fast,” Hall says. “Get in and out of stock quickly, really be able to put their bets where the money is. It’s the old short order, but it’s been digitalised.” So how are these companies managing to turn around clothes so quickly?
For a start, they are on the doorstep of a large wholesale district. A couple of miles north of Boohoo’s cotton mill lies Manchester’s Cheetham Hill suburb. Shop names flash past the car. Papaya Fashion, Babez, Fashion Zoo. “This area you could call the Silicon Valley of Fashion,” says Sam Puri, co-founder of young startup Shelikes, although it seems more like a fashion wilderness. He is making his daily pilgrimage to Stylewise, the wholesaler owned by his father, Sunny, which supplies Shelikes with most of its clothes.
It’s fun to imagine Little Mix, who have worn complimentary Shelikes clothes, in Stylewise, with its rails and vats of clothes, neon playsuits bristling with static, shopped mostly by older men. Sunny moved to Manchester 25 years ago from Punjab and, just like Kamani senior, started off working in street markets. “Sometimes, I think, how come we’re in this trade? Because we never sold clothes in India. We had a showroom for car accessories. But maybe this was easier to get in. You don’t need much capital. You can get credit from the factories. Some people we knew were in this trade.”
Where in the world do they go to, for clothes that need to be turned round really fast? “Leicester,” say the Puris. “Leicester,” say Kamani and Passi, who both estimate that over half the clothes they sell are made in the UK.
Terraces of 1930s homes line Leicester’s Chesterfield Road, erupting on one side of the street into an industrial estate. Chesterfield Road is Boohoo heartland. At Soft Touch factory, which supplies Boohoo and Shelikes, the back door is open to rows of whirring sewing machines. The same sound rises from Cat Girl on the opposite side of the road too, another Boohoo supplier. The place is clattering with industry.
“Your Boohoo, your Cash & Carry kind of place, it’s a fast turnaround,” says Eva Szplit, the pattern cutter, above the noise from the next room. “We can do that. That’s why we’re busy. It’s cut and made and out the door.”
There is lots of evidence in these parts of an upsurge in manufacturing. A short walk up Chesterfield Road is the Sharma Women’s Centre. Founded 30 years ago to empower local women, Sharma has taught hundreds to machine-sew, supplying local factories with fresh workers. “Our sewing machine mechanic used to be free all the time,” says Amarjit Parmar, the centre’s hosiery manager. “Now we have to keep chasing him.”
An enlivening of British manufacturing sounds like a good news story, and mostly it is. But last month the Ethical Trade Initiative (ETI) published research showing that 75-90% of workers in Leicester’s garment factories were paid £3 an hour. Parmar has heard of workers being paid below the minimum wage of £6.50. Another Leicester-based manufacturer, Bhav Mandalia, has “had ex-staff coming to see if we’ve got any jobs,” he says. One, “a very experienced worker”, told him he had been offered a job at £3 an hour.
Szplit, of Cat Girl, has heard of no such thing. “It certainly doesn’t happen here,” she says. There is no suggestion that any of Boohoo’s, Missguided’s or Shelikes’ manufacturers meet their retailers’ needs unethically. Cat Girl has just passed a Sedex ethical audit. In August Boohoo launched a supplier manual, and hired a corporate social responsibility manager. Missguided says it follows “both the ETI base code and principles of implementation in the engagement of suppliers”, though none of Missguided, Boohoo nor Shelikes are members of the ETI.
But as fast fashion accelerates, and shoppers require their needs to be met at the right price and on the right day, retailers need to work harder to ensure ethical compliance in their supply chains. Melanie Rickey believes that high fashion is no longer enamoured of fast, cheap chic. “Conscious consumers wouldn’t go down this road,” she says. But she thought that Boohoo would never feature in Vogue, and the April issue includes a bomber jacket, costing £30, from that very brand. It is Boohoo’s first appearance in the style bible. Has it broken into the high fashion world after all?
Fashion has an edgy reputation, but it’s pretty conservative about fabric. Cotton still makes up a third of fibre production. The non-organic variety (only 4% of cotton used in fashion is “sustainable”) has a heavy eco burden, using 11% of all pesticides produced. Plus, it takes 20,000 litres of water to produce just 1kg. But most of our closet space goes to synthetic garments, which are derived from oil.
The industry is huge, producing – by my reckoning – more than 80bn new garments a year. We often dump clothes before the first wash. And while initiatives like Greenpeace’s Detox Fashion try to clean up fashion, in pollution terms the fashion industry still comes second only to the oil and gas industry. That’s some rap sheet.
I’m all for wardrobe biodiversity. Look out for pieces fashioned from “green” fibres like salmon leather or rice husks (food-industry byproducts) – 700m tons of rice are harvested worldwide every year, and the husks are being processed into rubber for shoes (M&S uses it in a new Eco Trainer). Meanwhile spoiled milk can be turned into a super-fine fibre that weighs less than wool or silk, and Econyl, a “regenerated” fibre spun from discarded fishing nets, is a sustainable alternative to the oil-derived Nylon 6.
While pulp from cellulosic fibre can be turned into yarn as an alternative to cotton, be on the alert. Canopy (an NGO focused on forest research) reveals that 100m trees are logged each year to be turned into rich dissolving pulp for clothing, 30% from ancient and endangered forests. (Check Canopy for brands committed to sustainable sourcing.) Also, be careful about brands using “eco” bamboo. Check that it was planted on degraded land, not where forest has been converted to a plantation to make a quick fashion buck.
The giant fashion brands suggest that recycling can neutralise fast fashion and have set up schemes for dropping discards off in-store. If that’s true I’ll eat my corn husk hat (possibly edible in any case). In reality turning your discarded jumpsuit into someone else’s sun dress is a technical headache some way off being fixed. Plus, it would be easier if we stuck to the same old fibres – at the moment 70% of our clothes are a cotton and polyester blend. Recyclers don’t enjoy mixing it up – fish leathers and milk silk will complicate things.
If you’re not going to go down the recycling route, you need to commit to treating “greener” pieces sustainably – that means wearing them for the long term and not being addicted to the latest micro trend. So be honest about what sort of consumer you are, and cut your cloth accordingly.
Here’s another tip on giving your wardrobe a sustainable makeover: clean your clothes well. Fashion lover Ludovic Blanc was a self-described ‘heavy user’ of dry cleaners. But his threads came back covered in a toxic sheen and the harsh process seemed to shorten their life span. So with his partner Mathilde he opened his own ecological cleaners. Blanc: Naturally Cleaner, in central and west London, uses Electrolux technology and biodegradable detergents to clean, thus cutting out the petroleum-based solvent perc (perchlorethylene). Although used widely by UK dry cleaners, perc is a triple threat, persisting in soil, air and water. It’s banned in the US, France and Denmark. The award-winning Blanc also gets the thumbs-up from Woolmark. For information, go to blancclean.com
Coined by residents of Totnes, a Transition town. Stands for ‘something wonderful in my backyard’ and celebrates eco communities. It’s the diametric opposite of nimbyism.
If you have an ethical dilemma, email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk
In 1994, four of the world’s most famous supermodels were splashed across billboards under the slogan “We’d rather go naked than wear fur”. Fast-forward 21 years and it seems it is now another story for Naomi Campbell, Kate Moss, Elle Macpherson and Cindy Crawford, who have been pictured in fur coats, gilets and trimmed parkas.
They are not alone in falling off the anti-fur wagon. Figures from the International Fur Federation show that the industry is enjoying another year of considerable growth. The demand for mink, sable, fox and ferret has soared and farmers have stepped up production.
In 2013/14, 87.2m mink pelts were produced around the world, worth a total of £2.2bn, with 35m produced by China alone.
China also remains one of the biggest producers of fox pelt, and together with Finland was responsible for 91% of the 7.8m fox furs produced globally.
The figures – the first to show a breakdown of different pelts – follow on from research by the IFF last year which valued the global fur trade at more than £26bn.
On the British catwalks last year, more than 60% of shows featured fur, and at New York fashion week the figure topped 70%. While luxury labels such as Fendi have a long history of featuring real fur in their shows, fur is increasingly being used by newer brands as well. In New York, the up-and-coming label Cushnie Et Ochs said fur was its favourite material of the season, adding that it was “not ashamed”.
This month Karl Largerfeld said he would be putting on a special “couture fur” show to mark his 50th anniversary of working for Fendi. “For me, fur is Fendi and Fendi is fur, fun furs” he said. “Fendi is my Italian version of creativity. The Fendi haute fourrure fashion show is the opportunity to stage the royal furs of furs.”
He told the New York Times: “For me, as long as people eat meat and wear leather, I don’t get the message. It’s very easy to say no fur, no fur, no fur, but it’s an industry. Who will pay for all the unemployment of the people if you suppress the industry of the fur?”
In the 80s it was a serious fashion faux pas to step out in real fur, but today’s celebrities are rarely seen out of it. Rihanna and Rita Ora have recently been pictured in real mink coats, and Kim Kardashian dressed her one-year-old daughter North West in what was thought to be a $3,500 (£2,300) crystal fox fur coat at last month’s New York fashion week.
Lady Gaga made a Naomi Campbell-esque turnabout on the issue. Having initially denounced fur, she was later pictured in a full-length coat made of white pelt, and went on to say: “You see a carcass, I see a museum pièce de résistance.”
Mark Oaten, CEO of the International Fur Federation, said he was unsurprised by the growth in productionas the taboo around wearing real fur was fading into irrelevance. “We knew from the catwalks that fur is certainly being used much more by designers and from some of the retail figures, which can be patchy and difficult, that the sales are going strongly,” he said. “So with this increase in demand, farmers are deciding to invest more in fur farms and increase production.”
Oaten, a former Liberal Democrat MP, said Asia and Hong Kong remained the big players in the fur trade, both in terms of demand and production, but emphasised there was a shift towards buyers in America and Europe.
“Designers appear to be embracing it, customers appear to be embracing it and we certainly find the younger generation have less of an issue with fur than the younger generation of the 1980s,” he said.
“But it’s changed rapidly, even in the past three or four months. We’ve seen a change of patterns of the kind of consumers in Asia. Six months ago I would have said Beijing and Shanghai are really hot markets, but now we are seeing a shift away to the second- and third-tier cities in China as well. We’ve also seen an enormous increase in America because fur has had an incredibly busy runway and it has also been extraordinarily cold.”
In the UK, members of the British Fur Trade Association reported a 20% increase in sales last year. The association’s chief executive, Mike Moser, said the growth was being driven as much by younger generations as by foreign millionaires.
“It’s hot stuff because fur is being used in a real fun way in fashion now,” he said. “It’s more accessible for young people because of the increase of fur trims on coats and fur accessories.
“The BFTA runs an annual competition for design students using fur and this year we’ve seen a 50% increase in the number of students taking art. They just want to use fur in their designs which proves there such a strong interest in the younger generation.”
While the fur industry in countries such as Canada, the US and Europe remains heavily regulated, concerns remain over China, which is much more lax about the welfare of animals. Oaten conceded it was a concern for the IFF and said cleaning up the Chinese fur trade remained a priority.
“Obviously with so much mink coming from China, one of my big priorities is to make sure that they understand what the requirements are for welfare,” he said. “I was in China a couple weeks ago meeting with government officials. They have already adopted Council of Europe guidelines on welfare and we’ve had a long dialogue with them to implement even stronger welfare protocols. The difficulty does still lie in ensuring these regulations are always enforced in such a large country.”
Oaten said he was a personal fan of pelts. “I use a lot of fur for interiors,” he said. “Though I’ve not yet found a fur coat that suits me.”
I like to keep things tidy. I can’t work if things around me are messy, disorganised, and become chaotic. Even the things I pin to my boards are pinned properly, and in some order. I grew up in Belgrade, and apparently even when I was a little girl I was very tidy. I was born with it. I believe that all the elements of your personality eventually end up in your work. So my fashion designs have strong architectural elements, colour blocking and structure. It’s the same in the office. I am a perfectionist.
This is the place where I do most of my design work. We are on the top floor and there is a lovely terrace that wraps around it, with lots of light. The view is of the canal in Shoreditch. It’s an urban landscape – lots of rooftops and council blocks, and an incredible sky. The sky in London is amazing – fluorescent pink and orange and stormy grey. I spend most of my day inside and don’t have a chance to enjoy nature, so it’s nice to have that connection through the window.
On the board behind me you can see the inspiration for my AW15 collection. Also on the board are the artists I’m into right now .
I love to start the creative process by looking at art. I am drawn to artists who love the same thing as I do. I recently came across a young Canadian artist called Lara King who creates beautiful minimal sculptures out of torn and folded paper.
I find inspiration everywhere, and have a passion for colour. For one collection, I paired orange with yellow after seeing it on a crane on a building site. Building sites are inspiring because they’re full of bright primaries. I like plastic packaging and boxes and unrecycled things. My Instagram is full of it.
My office is mostly white, with pops of colour, which allows me to think about colour in my work. All the furniture blends in. I have a simple white desk and white chairs. When it comes to design, I always choose looks over comfort. I am happy to sit on an uncomfortable chair all day as long as it looks beautiful.
“This cape had a hook and she wanted a tie, and she wasn’t able to open it with her hands. That’s all there is to it. Madonna, as we all know, is very difficult.” So said Giorgio Armani, attempting to explain the singer’s recent Armani-clad tumble at the Brit Awards. Clearly, fastenings on clothes matter. But in recent seasons they have moved beyond their position as functional items – and occasional sources of wardrobe malfunctions – to become style statements in their own right.
The rise of the statement fastening began last autumn at Celine, where white and yellow buttons created diagonal patterns on black and grey coats, then popped up on buttoned-up jumpsuits, sculptural metal fastenings and visible poppers for spring. If buttons brought a warm, organic feeling to Celine – a fashion house best known for pared-back minimalism – at Louis Vuitton the fastenings were as racy as the Sticky Fingers album cover. Large exposed zips appeared on coats, dresses and skirts for autumn, with eye-catching exposed flies on trousers were spring’s key motif.
Two of London’s most influential designers, JW Anderson and Christopher Kane, also have long-standing fascinations with fastenings. Last season, Anderson’s buttons looked like tea strainers and flowers. Kane prefers chunky seatbelt buckles, which close his handbags and coats with a satisfying click. At the latest round of catwalk shows, for autumn 2015, Victoria Beckham showed oversized tortoiseshell buttons and buckle-loop belts. At Prada, there was an elegant rash of contrasting buttons, while Loewe presented diagonal zips and harness-like loops. Fastenings are brilliant for the high street, too, adding detail with minimal expense. Key pieces for the spring including Topshop’s baby blue cashmere jacket with back and silver exposed zip and Whistles’ caramel-coloured sarong skirt held together with a big black button.
There’s certainly something in the air, according to London College of Fashion creative director Tony Glenville: “The Musée des Arts Décoratifs has a button exhibition at the moment,” he says, “showing how designers from Chanel to Dior used buttons to create balance or diagonally emphasis the line on clothes.”
But really, he says, the current mood is all about designers moving on from the recent minimalist trend and mining the 1970s for inspiration: “Think of the zip dresses of Azzedine Alaïa; the frog fastening and braid used by Yves Saint Laurent in his ‘Russian’ collection, and the whole idea of trimmings and fastenings supporting a look. In the 1970s, design houses developed the idea that if a jacket has slightly more buttons or fastens slightly higher, the silhouette is immediately transformed.”
Of course, this is fashion, and all fastenings are not equal. A lascivious back zip, from the nape of the neck to the bottom of the hemline, is a bit of a no-no in style circles, recalling the ubiquitous high street copies of Roland Mouret’s spectacularly successful 2005 range. Aside from that – from duffle toggles to buckles inspired by climbing carabiners – fastenings are viewed as a neat way to bring a range of references to clothes.
“Unique fastenings certainly add to the beauty and intrigue of a specific piece,” says Natalie Kingham, buying director at designer boutique Matchesfashion.com. Like any ardent fashion fan, Kingham believes that much of an outfit’s desirability lies in the details – even if the wearer is the only one who knows they are there. “For next season, Erdem had some beautiful gold poppers inside his garments but it wasn’t something you’d see externally,” she says.
That said, with the ever-influential JW Anderson referencing the 1980s at his latest womenswear show at London Fashion Week, the 1970s influence could already be on the wane. There could be tricky days ahead for koumpounophobics, if fastenings go Dynasty: bigger, brasher and a lot less subtle. In any case, one thing is clear: it’s not just the clothes you wear but how you do them up that counts.
I read an article earlier this year in an American newspaper that said “a revolt” was beginning on the red carpet among female celebrities. Did this revolt happen?
Caroline, by email
Oh my God, Caroline, how could you have missed it? It was veritable bloodshed at the Oscars, I tell you – bloodshed! Julianne Moore decapitated E!’s Giuliana Rancic for asking “Who are you wearing?”; Reese Witherspoon stabbed Ryan Seacrest when he tried to put her hand in the mani-cam, and Patricia Arquette turned up in a burlap sack, flummoxing fashion editors who weren’t sure if she was making a statement or was this made-to-order Balenciaga? Behind all the carnage, the rest of the female celebrities marched down waving banners and chanting slogans: “No, no, we won’t go, the red carpet is a load of bull!”
I jest. Nothing of the sort happened. There has been talk for some time of an imminent red-carpet revolution, including, I’m proud to say, in this very column, which last year promised a full-on massacre of entertainment journalists. The New York Times, which always takes its editorial direction from this column, followed a year later (try to keep up, New York Times!), promising that “On the red carpet, a revolt builds over pageantry.”
And did this revolt happen? In all honesty, it did not. There were some half-hearted changes from the Oscars red-carpet coverage this year – E! ditched the mani-cam and there was a vague attempt on the part of some entertainment journalists to ask female celebrities about something other than their dresses. #askhermore, urged the social media hashtag (and you just knew there’d be a hashtag behind this, didn’t you? It’s a wonder how the suffragettes got off the ground without one). Unfortunately, no one remembered until it was too late that the only subjects most US actresses like to talk to journalists about, when not shilling clothes, are their amazing charitable contributions, how wonderful and amazing everyone they work with is and what an incredible calling the acting profession truly is. Great TV this does not make, and while watching women being commanded to flaunt their manicures wasn’t much fun either, I don’t think anyone watching the Oscars was convinced we’d arrived at a long-term solution.
It is, clearly, ridiculous that actors are expected to gussy themselves up like My Little Ponies to go to what is essentially an industry event, and that careers can be made and broken by the choosing of a dress. But that is the nature of the beast that has been built by the media, fashion designers and, yes, female celebrities working in cahoots, and not one of them is willing to break this bond. After all, celebrities have long since crossed over into being fashion models, as a glance at the covers of fashion magazines, which are now dominated by actors, not models, proves.
Reese Witherspoon was especially outspoken this year about the need for actresses to be asked about more than their clothes: “Let’s hear their stories!” she battlecried before the Oscars. As she finished battlecrying, she put down her megaphone and posed for a photo in her Oscars outfit, which she tweeted, detailing the source of everything she was wearing, from her dress to her jewels to something she referred to as her “glow”. The other female celebrities were similarly keen to give shout-outs to their designers. Perhaps those are their stories?
And just to prove that nothing’s really changed, E!’s indefatigable Rancic was so characteristically tenacious in her fashion criticism about the Oscars that one particular opinion verged on racist when she snarked that US actor Zendaya’s dreadlocks looked like they smelled of marijuana. Rancic later apologised, although in today’s social media climate I’m not sure if she felt bad about the racism or the failure to #askhermore.
No one looks to the Oscars for guidance about movies. If your innocence wasn’t destroyed when Crash won best film, then it must have been when Boyhood didn’t. For heaven’s sake, have you seen the people of the academy who vote for this? They make the Republican party look demographically diverse. No, the Oscars has become completely about the clothes, and this is because the media cover the event, female celebrities know they can get extra publicity by looking good and designers will take any free advertising they can get. The morning after, I turned on the TV in Los Angeles and, while reading analysis of the dresses in the New York Times, the LA Times and the British press, I was able to flick between – no exaggeration – five TV programmes debating the merits of the dresses. No one, it seemed, was too interested in the actors’ “stories”, but they were all fascinated by Julianne Moore’s gown: some of them liked it and – waddyaknow! – some of them didn’t, suggesting fashion analysis is not the objective scientific study it is sometimes portrayed as being.
I recently interviewed the wonderful Angela Lansbury. She recalled that, the first time she went to the Oscars, in 1945, there was no press on the red carpet. She wore a simple dress she’d bought, took her mother as her date and got on with her night. No matter how many social media hashtags are coined, the media still values female celebrities by their looks, and so do the vast majority of people who consume the media (not you. You’re far more intellectual). So, until the media stop covering the red carpet, it will always about the dress. And when will the media stop covering the red carpet, obsessing over actress’s looks and reducing them to show ponies? I can exclusively reveal that it will be at 10 past never.
Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com
There are still black leather dresses in the shops for infant Avengers. But they look a bit passé by now. This winter fashion-conscious children are wearing light-flowered wool, genuine or near-genuine Liberty prints. I have never actually met a child dressed quite so much like an adult. But they obviously exist.
They do not want flounces, these sophisticated children; they spurn tiny bows and wishy-washy colours; they have taken up denim and abandoned organdie. Children’s clothes suppliers may keep their soppy names - Gay Child, Small Wonder, Little People - but their merchandise has become comparatively brutal. The clothes in the new Small Wonder shop are bold and sensible; small dark smocks, subtly striped Finnish cotton shifts, stretch jeans. They make a few concessions to gentility; this is, after all, the heart of Chelsea. But basically, Small Wonder is anti-sentimental, on the way to the offhand adult shops farther down King’s Road: His Clothes, for instance, and Top Gear.
I think it has been pushed in that direction. First by Marks and Spencer, whose practical, bright, imaginative designs make pastels with frills look absurd. Secondly, more specifically, by Grade One, a small South Kensington shop opened two years ago by a young architect (and father). His business grew into a department in Woollands, and now a brand-new pine-fitted Swiss Cottage branch. Alistair Cowin’s clothes are tough, decorative, jolly. Absolutely classless, too; quite cheap.
He sat on the cutting table in his grey denim suit, a large-scale version of his child designs, which helped to explain why his clothes are beginning to go beyond Grade One. It is simple: grown-ups keep coming in and asking for children’s clothes. Twelve-year-old sizes are wide enough already: “We’ve only got to add three inches to the hem.”
All the clothes illustrated are available from Grade One, 8 New College Parade, Finchley Road, London NW3.
To date more than 50,000 tickets have been sold online by the V&A for Savage Beauty, the astonishingly immersive exhibition of the work of Alexander McQueen, and it doesn’t even open until 14 March. These pilgrims will follow in the footsteps of those who queued day and night across Central Park in New York to see the first edition of the show at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. I hope that few of these fans, students, and interested people will spend any more of their money on two of the books released in time to leverage maximum gain from exploiting McQueen’s life and death. Not, at any rate, if they are looking for the keys to understanding the reasons that make him a force of lasting importance in British fashion culture.
The trouble with Andrew Wilson’s biography, Alexander McQueen: Blood Beneath the Skin, and Gods and Kings: The Rise and Fall of Alexander McQueen and John Galliano, by Dana Thomas, is that – for all their seemingly exhaustive research – they are insinuating, brutally non-empathetic works calculated to fire hatred for the individuals concerned, and for the fashion industry itself. Both are easy targets, especially when their stories involve the death of a young, talented person who cannot defend himself.
Full disclosure: I am a fashion critic who witnessed the careers of McQueen and Galliano from their early years onwards and deserve some glancing references in both books. My problem is not that I wish to be a whitewashing apologist for the behaviour of any one personality, nor for the workings of the mega-corporations that took them up. We know McQueen committed suicide, and that John Galliano publicly disgraced himself, was fired, and is now making his first steps to a comeback as the designer behind the Maison Martin Margiela label (Thomas’s book is timed to coincide with his recent debut). But what I would hope for in any biographical work is an intelligent distance, a long perspective that attempts to place events within their times.
Those perspectives deserve measured comparisons that neither of these books attempts to make. Going to the heart of the matter ought to involve consideration of what can happen to any star whose vaulting talent is taken up, celebrated and pressured at a young age. Is the world of fashion any more culpable on those measures than the music industry, Hollywood or sport? Addiction, nasty behaviour, burnout, self-destruction are par for the course in all areas.
Fashion underwent a massive transformation at precisely the time Galliano and McQueen were picked up by the French luxury conglomerate LVMH, McQueen as the creative director at Givenchy, and Galliano at Christian Dior. It was the post-millennium era, when globalisation happened and celebrity red-carpet culture was invented and the power of the internet exploded. For the first time, fashion designers found themselves in the spotlight, expected to be constantly performing stars. When they found that humanly impossible – when they retreated down their own self-destructive escape routes – apparently it was 50/50 their own fault.
There is a cultural backdrop to place them in, too. McQueen should properly be seen as part of the cohort of Britart and Britpop of the 90s – a fearless autodidact and impresario who drew on the mechanisms of theatre, film, dance and music in his sensational, visceral, 45-minute performance works. He followed Galliano into that British-made field; a place where the influence of London clubs, art history and story-making blossomed into live experiences. The medium was clothes, but they were operating at a psychological level far beyond fashion.
None of that can be gleaned from these books. Both read as blow-by-horrible-blow narratives pieced together from the accounts of those people who agreed to talk to the authors. Thomas is a journalist whose career has focused on analysing and documenting the ins and outs of corporate finance in fashion, and she makes a relentlessly unflattering, foredoomed job of it on that front. But to read her brass-tacks account, you’d get the impression that Galliano’s career has been fail after fail. She implicates the “gushing” fashion press in praising his work – we’re an easy bunch to disparage – yet she seems more or less blind to the meaning and emotion others may have felt at Galliano’s or McQueen’s shows.
Wilson, not a fashion insider, gained access to members of McQueen’s family. Thanks to him, McQueen’s childhood abuse at the hands of his violent brother-in-law, which the designer was careful never to spell out even to friends, is now exposed as common knowledge and a coda to his work.
The result is that the weaknesses and excesses of both men are unsparingly detailed, their homosexual relationships salaciously probed, raw wounds ripped open. Galliano is flayed as a flawed, fragile genius haplessly unprepared for the struggle to make it as a business person. His assistant, Steven Robinson – a talented, tirelessly devoted protector at Christian Dior – is portrayed as a monster. That was never the impression I got of the helpful, enthusiastic young man who proudly showed me every detail of the clothes after each Dior show. But Robinson died, unable to defend his reputation.
No quarter or credit is given to either designer for the fact that they both started as disadvantaged, working-class boys whose exceptional minds, technical finesse and sheer, bloody-minded ambition pushed the theatre of fashion far beyond the confines of mere commerce. It doesn’t worry me though. Galliano is getting a second chance to retrieve himself. McQueen doesn’t need to; posthumously, his reputation is only growing. An industry of books and movies may be growing up around him, as it would around a dead rock star. But he wasn’t a rock star. He did it through fashion, and everyone who really wants to understand what that meant need only line up to see it at the V&A.
Gods and Kings: The Rise and Fall of Alexander McQueen and John Galliano is published by Allen Lane (£25). To buy it for £20 click here
Alexander McQueen: Blood Beneath the Skin is published by Simon & Schuster (£25). To buy it for £20 click here
Kanye West is nothing if not tenacious when it comes to breaking into the fashion industry. His latest strategy? Telling Gap that he should be the company’s new creative director or – to use a recurring West metaphor – “I’d like to be the Steve Jobs of the Gap”.
“When I say Steve Jobs of the Gap,” he told Style.com, “as I talk to the people at the Gap right now, I’m not talking about a capsule. I’m talking about full Hedi Slimane creative control of the Gap is what I would like to do. And I can say this because it doesn’t conflict with my Adidas contract.”
This isn’t West’s first overture to Gap – in 2013 he approached them but “couldn’t get past the politics”. What is tantalising, this time, is that in theory it could actually happen. West has just launched a collection for Adidas, receiving a tentative critical thumbs up. The ailing Gap is currently short of a creative director, having cut ties with Rebekka Bay last month. Bay – the woman who successfully launched Cos – was hired two years previously to bring fashion nous to the US chain, but her nuanced approach did not work on a multinational scale. A West-helmed Gap, though, could be genius. Here’s why:
Judging by his collection for Adidas, West’s Gap would involve sportswear and hosiery. Specifically, an apocalyptic Flashdance vibe with Prada-influenced wrinkly knees on tights. There is not enough of this on the high street.
West would be unafraid to pay clear homage to fellow designers rather than resorting to the usual esoteric designer cliches. “You know my fucking influences,” he told Style.com: “You see Raf Simons right there, you see Helmut [Lang], you see [Martin] Margiela, you see Vanessa [Beecroft], you see Katharine Hamnett. It’s blatantly right there. I’m not going to try and act like I was influenced by a fucking dog walking down the street that broke its ankle that I had a heartfelt discussion with. I had a heartfelt discussion with all of these fucking Helmut Lang images that I stared at for so many years. I had a heartfelt discussion with my Tumblr.”
There are normal clothes and there is aspirational faux-normal fashion – a distinction West understands. He cannot abide mediocrity, saying: “I just feel like we’ve been hit with this barrage of extreme medium. And you never go and ask, “Hey, can I get an extreme medium?” Gap, on the other hand, was pilloried for its “dress normal” advertising campaign, which attempted to capitalise on the “normcore” trend for understated dressing in a series of adverts that made even Anjelica Huston look a bit boring. As in actually boring, not fashion boring. Got it?
In 2004’s Spaceship, West spoke of working at Gap. “Let’s go back, back to the Gap/Look at my check, wasn’t no scratch/So if I stole, wasn’t my fault/Yeah I stole, never got caught/They take me to the back and pat me/Askin’ me about some khakis/But let some black people walk in/I bet they show off their token blackie/Oh now they love Kanye, let’s put him all in the front of the store … So I quit, y’all welcome.” Clearly it didn’t go brilliantly, but West knows his subject.
Having courted the rarefied side of fashion – that critically panned Paris fashion week collection in 2011; his work with APC in 2013 – West’s current stance is to focus on the mainstream: “I’m only concerned with making beautiful products available to as many people as possible,” he told Style.com. “Everyone should have the good life … I hate the concept of limited edition completely. I hate the concept of separatism. Elitism. Classism. We’re all equal.” That last bit could be a Gap advertising tagline. All that and the ability to conjure up the most powerful of front rows (above), plus 11.3 million Twitter followers? Come on Gap. Make the call.
Would you wear clothing grown from a mixture of yeast, bacteria and a sugary green tea solution? How about from a combination of plant matter and microscopic mushrooms? These odd materials may sound like something out of the Jetsons’ wardrobe, but they could have an influence on how fashion is manufactured.
“I think the ability for us to grow our own clothing could have great positive potential,” says Erin Smith, artist in residence at Microsoft Research who brewed her own wedding dress. “Growing clothing from scratch could both eliminate carbon emissions caused by transportation and allow for a garment that can be grown to your precise dimensions and specifications.”
Smith produced her dress using a combination of tree mulch and mycelium – a type of naturally white fungus. The mycelium was bred in a tub of agricultural waste requiring very little added energy. Once the dress had been worn, it could be composted in the garden. She made the decision to grow her own dress because she didn’t want her wedding to be dictated by tradition and to have to wear something that would just sit in her wardrobe after the event.
“The concept behind a grown wedding dress was to take a one-time-use object and rethink its construction in order to have an appropriate material lifespan. The average cost of a wedding dress in the US is roughly $1,200 (£792) and can contain nearly 12 yards (11m) of fabric,” explains Smith, adding that making the fashion chain circular not only brings us closer to the environment but also reflects how needless our consumption habits are: “The wedding dress is a perfect example of a one-time-use, energy intensive and entirely non-sustainable model that is representative of so many of the choices that we make daily.”
Growing a garment from mycelium isn’t a novel concept. The most notable figure in the field of biomaterials is Suzanne Lee, founder of BioCouture, a design consultancy that works with brands to apply similar technology to sportswear and luxury fashion products. Lee has been experimenting with the idea of fermenting clothes for over a decade and has grown a type of vegetable leather from green tea, sugar, bacteria and yeast.
Back in 2004, a team at the University of Western Australia showcased a jacket from living tissue – mouse and human cells to be specific. And, a couple of years ago, Bioalloy, a research project based in the labs at the same university, produced a garment from alcohol using fibrous cellulose created by introducing bacteria into red wine.
Scientists and designers are increasingly looking at ways to blur the boundaries between biology and fashion. The technology is clearly there, but what about the demand? There is an acknowledgment that biomaterials are unlikely to replace cotton and leather, and that fast fashion will keep relying on oil-based polymers like polyester.
Lee has previously argued that biomaterials such as microbial cellulose would simply be “a smart and sustainable addition to our increasingly precious natural resources”. They do have environmental advantages, particularly in terms of water. For example, the team behind Scoby Tec’s biker jacket brewed from kombucha (a fermented drink made with tea, sugar, bacteria and yeast) claims that only 60 litres of water are required for one square metre of its leather. In comparison, it takes 20,000 litres to produce a single T-shirt and pair of jeans, according to WWF.
Despite the clear advantages, there are challenges that need addressing before bacteria-grown clothes can reach the racks. First, there’s an issue of scalability. The current processes used are arduous and time-consuming. It took Smith about a week to grow her dress. And, if you followed Lee’s DIY recipe, it would take two to four weeks to grow your material. The question for the fashion industry therefore is how it can deliver such garments on a commercial scale without cutting corners to save money. A possible scenario highlighted by Lee is one where industrial vats of sugar from streams of food waste provide the breeding ground for bacteria.
Second, there are doubts about whether people would happily wear something that has been fashioned from waste. A straw poll carried out suggests that some are uncomfortable with the idea. One respondent said it would be like putting dirty clothes back on after a bath. Others said that the thought of it made their skin crawl. Another said that we already wear silk (in his own words: “protein from a worm’s a***”), so we shouldn’t have any qualms about pulling bacteria-grown clothes off the racks.
Given the technology’s environmental benefits, including the fact that the materials can be biodegraded after use, would applying it to manufacture supposedly unnecessary high-end items be counterproductive if it could be scaled up and people could overcome their aversion? Smith suggests not, because people are always going to buy and throw away clothes regardless. Growing them is simply an eco-friendly alternative.
“It’s essential that consumers become more aware of the continued lifespan of their things once they’ve been thrown away,” she says. “Any object made from materials that will outlive its intended use is a part of our global waste problem.”
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
The morning I’m due to meet Chantelle Winnie, I’m at the doctor’s and mention I’m interviewing someone with the skin condition vitiligo. The doctor’s advice is to maintain eye contact throughout. Never let the eye wander towards her physical “abnormalities”. I had been prepared to ask Chantelle what she thought of this, but within a minute of watching her in full-on model mode, under a blinding skylight designed to unleash the black-and-white marble tones of her body, it becomes obvious there is no need. It would be rude not to stare at her skin.
Chantelle is, after all, a runway queen influenced by the walk of Naomi Campbell and the iconoclasm of Marilyn Monroe. She’s also a former contestant on US reality show America’s Next Top Model (ANTM), the new face of Desigual, and muse of famed photographer Nick Knight and London designer Ashish. Her skin condition has made her career and become a symbol for diversification and progression. As ANTM’s host Tyra Banks says: “The moment I laid eyes on Chantelle, I wanted her on Top Model. Her beauty is undeniable and her skin breaks down barriers of what is considered beautiful.” Yet it’s also an albatross. Marvel at the albatross all you want, but the more you remind Chantelle of its presence the further it vexes her.
“This skin here is a white block,” says the photo- grapher, pointing at Chantelle’s abdomen. “You can’t see the difference in colour.” The way her plaited skirt is resting above her hips only flaunts the off-white of her stomach. More flesh is required to demonstrate the variations.
Chantelle obliges. She rearranges the skirt, glances down at her dainty arm against her abs, flips her hand back/forth, white/black, matching/contrasting. She works the camera more than your average model. She pivots, she glides, she gracefully topples sideways to the bass of Major Lazer’s “Bubble Butt”.
“My skin’s not a normal sight,” she explains later, separating some hummus from a pumpernickle sarnie. “When a photographer says: ‘I don’t know what it is, but that’s just not it…’ I know. They like the different colours of my skin. They’re not getting them with a particular outfit.” Chantelle is wearing delicate whites which won’t distract from her skin, the main event. It comes alive as she stretches her torso, showing off its unique markings beautifully.
Chantelle has been compared to a cheetah, which she doesn’t mind. She’s a Leo. Cheetahs are sexy. She cares far less for “gorgeous cow” compliments. They remind her of being 13 and walking into the school auditorium where a bully led a chorus of “Moo! Moooooooooooo!” So unpleasant, but only marginally more so than the line in ANTM when a judge gasps: “Wow! You’re like an X-Man! But can you model?”
Chantelle is an inspirational conversationalist. She wants to blow up the fashion world by adorning the cover of Vogue and walking for Chanel. She has a boss-ass, businesslike handshake. Last November, she gave a TED Talk in which she concluded there’s no reason to fit into preordained moulds as “there is beauty in everything”. You want to believe she’ll have an illustrious career. Not only would that challenge a notoriously homogenous industry, it would also reward Chantelle’s modelling talents, which she has in spades. “If humans want to see the same types of people over and over that’s what industries will give us. If we want to see something different that’s what they’ll have to give us. People used to put me in a category with [albino models] Shaun Ross and Diandra Forrest. That is segregating. I don’t want to be put in a category.”
The thing Chantelle can’t pinpoint so astutely is that vitiligo only gets her so far before it becomes a hindrance. Take her Instagram, for instance. Without it, she would never have caught the attention of Tyra Banks. Her community of 400,000 fans are there to ogle over her most compelling asset. Whether she likes it or not, she’s a walking advertisement for outsiderdom first, and a model for stuff second. Her skin is more striking than any product she could sell. So every time I delve deeper into the subject of vitiligo, her answers become more opaque, her manner defensive. “I dropped out of school when I was 16, 17, I don’t recall.” Chantelle is 20. There are wounds there, a repressed anger.
Chantelle Brown Young was born to a single- mother hairdresser in Toronto. She tried her hand at everything: ballet, piano, journalism. Never modelling. She moved schools numerous times due to bullying and “altercations”. As her school attendance fell, modelling opportunities came to her. Her break arrived when local YouTube personality Shannon Boodram saw her Facebook pictures and asked to shoot her for a music video. For the first time she was celebrated for her looks. Requests to do editorial work came in despite her rejection from every agency in Toronto (she still isn’t represented today). When Tyra Banks called, Chantelle jacked in school for good and flew to LA faster than you can say: “Congratulations, you’re in the running towards becoming America’s Next Top Model.”
“People ask me: would you do it again? No. I want to be a model, not a reality star.” Chantelle was the second contestant eliminated. At the time she felt “stabbed in the back”.
Tyra Banks promotes diversity by blasting it into the homes of millions, but there’s also a crass exploitation there, which plays on a toxic cocktail of the contestants’ narcissism and vulnerability. Chantelle’s particular TV “freak-show” factor was her vitiligo. She developed the autoimmune disease when she was four. Vitiligo affects 1% of the population. It doesn’t discriminate against skin type or age and can attack any part of the body including eyes, hair and mouth, resulting in depigmentation patches.
Chantelle has made a conscious decision to celebrate her skin as it is. There are “treatments”: UVA light therapy, skin dye, make-up, topical medicines, even surgery. They don’t interest her. Some vitiligo victims have spoken of their frustrations with Chantelle. One woman expressed disappointment at Chantelle’s promotion of a brand of foundation, furious that she’d wear anything besides mascara and lipstick. “Hold up. I don’t care what you do, this is what I do,” counters Chantelle. “It’s my life. I’m very happy for whatever choice you want to make. Getting your eyebrows done, lip injections, a haircut, liposuction, that’s your choice. People think that because I’m so proud of my skin I stand for making no changes. I’m not for or against anything other than being happy.”
Chantelle prepares for a days’ work with a few hours’ sleep, some Netflix, water and cans of Red Bull – which are peppered around her dressing room. On set she keeps herself occupied by flicking through her Instagram. “There are some diehard fans – my army. Some are artists who draw me over and over and over again. I love it.” She’s also a music nerd, distracted by Kyle, her manager/DJ, who plays Rihanna throughout the afternoon while Chantelle mouths along. Her biggest inspiration outside fashion is the rap sensation Drake, who Instagrams a picture of himself hanging out with her several days after this interview. “The whole OVO team [Drake’s record label] is so iconic. There’s no other group of people who were friends for so long and have built an empire off those friendships.” Chantelle’s best friends are her mother, her two sisters and Kyle, her manager, who never leaves her side. Although Chantelle had never heard of Desigual or Ashish or Nick Knight when they contacted her, Kyle had. Her success less than a year after appearing on ANTM is unprecedented.
Ashish himself is unstinting in his praise: “Winnie’s unique look challenges perceptions of beauty in an industry obsessed with a kind of ‘perfection’ and a mainstream notion of what is beautiful or edgy,” he says. “Casting Winnie in the show made it so much more than just an issue about skin colour. It was about questioning stereotypes of models that we see on the runways, and about role models for young women.
Her lack of representation, however, is not an act of defiance. “I would love to be signed to an agency. I’ve brought myself very far, but with an agency backing me it would be easy sailing.” She doesn’t want to be seen as just a “spokesmodel” for vitiligo. “If one day I’m all black I’m still a model. If one day I’m all white I’m still a model. I am not my skin. I am a model with a skin condition.” Mistaken assumptions about Chantelle’s vitiligo still dog her. “I get comments saying that I’m a leper, I control how my skin changes, I bleach my skin, my skin’s burned. None of those are true. The world is looking at me now. I either let the haters affect me or I step my money up. When I stand back from all the hate and I check my bank account... Hahahahaha.”
Chantelle’s story is one of hope in a superficial industry – proof that our differences are cause for celebration on magazine covers – but it’s also one of frustration. Her biggest challenge is to get past what makes her different, to celebrate what makes her the same. Before we part, one final question: what’s your favourite feature? “My lips. I like my lips.”
There is no fool like a fool with children. Parenthood makes pinheads of us all. I considered myself perfectly sane until I became pregnant and found myself importing a specific model of buggy from New York on the basis that it was no longer manufactured in the UK, as though London was some sort of buggy desert and 943 different types didn’t already exist in John Lewis. I know parents with tutors for their five-year-olds and others who queued all night (or paid the nanny to) for their offspring to gain entry to a gymnastics course. When it comes to our children, nothing but the best will do. It isn’t exclusively a London thing. It isn’t just a late-motherhood thing. It’s everywhere spare money flows.
If children are the white-hot focus of our aspirations, it stands to reason that they won’t be dressed in Primark. The UK childrenswear market is worth £5.6bn, according to Euromonitor, with a retail value estimated to rise to £5.9bn by 2017. Social factors such as a rapidly increasing birth rate, parents having children later in life and a glut of baby-boomer grandparents with more disposable income at their fingertips than at any point in history have combined to make childrenswear a highly lucrative business. And nowhere more so than at the designer end of the spectrum.
Caramel Baby & Child (where a party dress can cost up to £250) has seen sales increase by 20% for the past three years, while luxury online retailers, such as Alex and Alexa (which sells more than 9,000 items by labels including Dior, Fendi, Burberry and Ralph Lauren), are thriving. Little wonder that Net-a-Porter has registered the domain name Petite-a-Porter or that Harrods recently expanded its childrenswear department to 66,000 sq ft.
Without question it is the internet, with its endless pap shots of celebrity offspring, which is fuelling demand for a designer childhood. Screwed up, perhaps, but since nobody is going to stop papping them any time soon, you can’t blame the fames for wanting to use the situation to their advantage. Celebrities latched on long ago to the idea of child as brand extension: cute kid + cool clothes + famous parents = good PR. Never mind how sweaty and uncomfortable one-year-old North West might be in her scaled-down Givenchy biker jacket and matching leather drainpipes: being tricked out as her mother’s mini-me ensures the flashbulbs keep popping, a state of affairs which is essential to the Kardashian brand.
Ditto Harper Beckham, who, while she has yet to clone Victoria by wearing a pencil skirt, will still prove a useful ally when the time comes for her mother to branch into childrenswear. Harper already has her own dedicated Voguepedia page, while on parenting websites eager mothers swap tips on how to recreate her nonchalant topknot. And it is hardly Prince George’s fault that parents (OK, mothers) all over the world are scrutinising his every style move. Everything he has worn – the Start-Rite shoes, the Cath Kidston tank top, the Petit Bateau dungarees and the Rachel Riley shorts – sold out within 48 hours, prompting Forbes to dub him “the world’s most influential toddler”. Does the world need a most influential toddler? Apparently so.
With North, Harper, Suri, Blue Ivy and Prince George foisted on us from every angle, it would be easy to imagine that an appetite for immaculately turned-out children didn’t exist before Google. Taking pride in your progeny’s appearance is as old as parenthood itself, though it was only after the Second World War that British parents began to aspire to anything more than “cleanliness” for their offspring, since the childrenswear market didn’t exist on a mass scale before then. In the 60s and 70s, brands such as Adams and Ladybird (both launched in the 30s) were as aspirational as Mini Boden is now, even if looking respectable was more of a concern for parents.
“It’s not a new phenomenon for women to want their kids to look well turned-out,” agrees Estelle Lee, editor in chief of parenting magazine Smallish. “But the fashion industry has adapted to make children a prime area for growth as our attitudes adapt and society becomes more child-centric. Whether it’s clothes, parties, after-school activities or education, it’s vital for parents to invest in their kids. Lives are busy, and there’s an expectation of return on investment with our children.”
Some might argue that the fashion industry was actually quite slow to adapt. In launching Baby Dior in 1967, the house of Dior was way ahead of the curve: it took until 1978 for Ralph Lauren to launch childrenswear, and even then he was something of a lone wolf. It was only in the 2000s that other fashion designers who showed their collections on the international catwalks decided to expand their reach, presumably reasoning that it was never too early to cultivate brand loyalty. Little Marc Jacobs launched in 2005; Stella McCartney Kids in 2010; Lanvin, Marni, Gucci and Fendi Kids all arrived in 2011, and Dolce & Gabbana brought up the rear in 2012. But the biggest player is Burberry, which reported £79m in revenue from childrenswear for the fiscal year 2013/14 – around 4% of the company’s total.
For London-based designer Roksanda Ilincic, a favourite of Samantha Cameron, the decision to launch Blossom in 2012 was less about building brand loyalty than answering her customers’ needs – and her own, since the birth of her daughter in 2011 changed her perspective. “I wanted to move into an area that fit with my and my friends’ lifestyle,” says Ilincic, whose prices start at £135 and who caters for two- to eight-year-olds. Creating an army of “mini-mes” was not her prime intention. “Blossom complements my ready-to-wear collection because it evolves from the same mood and inspiration. My sole aim is to design beautiful, well-made, comfortable clothing for all ages. It’s up to my customers how they fit that into their lifestyle.” And while some of the fancier “occasionwear” is dryclean only, Ilincic tries to keep things low maintenance. “Practicality is a major consideration – not least because I have the experience of motherhood. Simple, everyday items are easily handwashed.”
Not all designers are as sympathetic to the time-pressed mother’s cause – perhaps because their customers are only time-pressed in the sense that they need to fit in a mani, a yoga class and a juice cleanse before school pick-up. A Google search for “luxury childrenswear” quickly reveals a £400 pink sequin Dolce & Gabbana dress (specialist dryclean only), a £999 “spiral fur and cashmere cape” by Harrods and a Christian Dior party dress with “sophisticated layers of ravishing red silk organza, and gemstone embellishment. The price? £2,700. Butler not included.
While there is a market for this craziness, or else it wouldn’t exist, it is a niche one, largely comprising the cash-rich, time-rich wives of oligarchs and footballers, with the occasional Kardashian thrown in. “There are people who will splurge hundreds on frothy designer ‘pieces’ without batting an eyelid,” says Estelle Lee. “But most mothers are not idiots, no matter what their disposable incomes. That means spending as much as they can afford when the cost reflects sustainable manufacture, natural fabrics and good-quality cuts which will wear well and can be handed down. I’ve got two boys, so always try to buy ‘best’ quality. Ralph Lauren jackets – in the sale – will last years.”
Besides, if you really want your children to look cool, draping them in designer labels is not the way. There is a growing swell of style-conscious parent for whom trumpeting your wealth and status through an obvious label is anathema. It is far more imaginative – and tasteful – to pander to a certain aesthetic than a certain brand. The accidental poster woman for this movement is Courtney Adamo, the 33-year-old founder of online shopping portal Babyccino Kids. Her curation of an international mix of independent kids’ brands receives over 100,000 unique visitors a month. “It’s not that I have super-strong feelings against designer childrenswear, but I would prefer to support independent designers,” says Adamo. “While Babyccino Kids is style focused, we also believe in letting your kids climb trees and play freely. Most of the brands we work with are created by other mothers who pour so much love into their products, often making them by hand from natural and organic materials. I’d rather invest in products like this than shell out a bunch of money on a status symbol.”
As Adamo’s 85,000 Instagram followers will attest, there is a demand for quality childrenswear, most of which adheres to an aesthetic best described as “nostalgic”, though it could equally be labelled “north London”. Roughly translated, this means corduroy pinafores, pin-tuck blouses and ribbed tights for girls, and button-through shirts, suede desert boots and colourful shorts or trousers for boys. Fuchsia, diamanté and logos are verboten, be they Dolce, Disney, Gucci or Gap.
It’s a look which Estelle Lee sees as part of a backlash against the cult of the celebrity mini-me. “Designers like Elfie or Rachel Riley are paying homage to a childhood from yesteryear. Enid Blyton would be delighted with Caramel Baby & Child’s schoolgirl knitwear or La Coqueta’s Peter Pan collars. With increasingly complex lives, the middle classes are trying to fetishise the childhoods of their youth with mary janes, long socks and smocking.” This might explain why Prince George shifts so many products – his pantaloons might charm people as much as his pedigree.
Perhaps it’s not so much nostalgia as an attempt to halt time, to preserve our children’s childhood in an aspic of handstitched jumpers and T-bar shoes. In the UK in 2015 every child is royal, dressed just so and perched atop a throne concocted from its parents’ golden aspirations. “Here is the receptor of our dreams,” we cry in a manner that would make our ancestors weep for not having lived in an era when all anyone has to worry about is the provenance of their offspring’s PJs.
Chantelle Winnie’s army of fans includes artists, designers and photographers. For spring/summer 2015, she is wearing broderie Anglaise – one of this season’s key trends
Fashion editor: Jo Jones
Photographer: Mary Rozzi
Make-up: Adam Breuchaud for Tmg-la.com
Hair: Alfredo Llamas for Tmg-la.com using Bumble and Bumble
Photographed at Milk Studios, Los Angeles
Video: Hector Barriuso
Imagine the jumper you’re wearing now had skeletons in its closet. Imagine it was once a completely different piece of clothing in a previous life. That’s the idea behind eradicating waste in fashion.
Fashion is now affordable to millions of consumers, but the low-cost, high volume business model that allows this also encourages a culture of disposal, with an estimated 350,000 tonnes of clothing sent to landfill each year in the UK alone. 
With cotton prices fluctuating and agricultural land for food running out, the fashion industry is under increasing pressure to reduce its waste and become less dependent on virgin resources. Recycling textiles is one way of addressing both.
This isn’t something fashion brands have only just cottoned onto. Giorgio Armani launched its first eco project in 1995 with the development of a process to recycle denim. But in the 20 years since, interest has increased, with big brands like M&S, H&M and Patagonia running collection and recycling programmes for unwanted clothes.
Fashion brands alone, however, can’t drive waste out of the industry. While there is huge untapped potential in recycling textiles, technical challenges remain, in particular around separating the various fibres blended into one piece of clothing. To build the materials, technology and infrastructure that will enable a more sustainable fashion industry require industry wide collaboration.
On Wednesday 18 February, 1.30pm - 2.30pm GMT, experts in fashion and the circular economy will join us online to take your questions, including:
Carola Tembe, environmental sustainability coordinator working on closing the loop, product integrity and sustainable material, H&M.
Lucy Norris, anthropologist at University College London with an interest in waste and materials, reuse and recycling.
Lynn Wilson, textiles expert and manager of the Love your Clothes campaign in Scotland.
Annie McCourt, fashion and textile associate at the Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation Institute.
The live chat is completely text based and will take place on this page in the comments section below, kicking off on Wednesday 18 February at 1.30pm GMT. You can submit any questions in advance by using the form below, tweeting them to @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB or sending an email to hannah.gould@theguardian.com and we’ll put them to the panel on the day.
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
Over the past few years we have seen a growing desire for more transparency in our clothing manufacturing processes. Just as consumers are becoming more informed about the pitfalls of mass-produced clothes, so more brands are emerging that cite ethical production as their purpose. This is great news for consumers who care about the people who make their clothes. But what do these brands bring to the table in terms of design credibility? Does a focus on ethics actually have staying power in a trend-driven market?
Fashion-conscious consumers today want to be able to make responsible choices, and now more than ever they can do so. With the whole world accessible in a single keystroke, we can vote with our fingertips. There’s an overwhelming desire for ethical fashion that doesn’t compromise on style; for shopping that can go hand-in-hand with making a statement of solidarity.
Making a statement with fashion is, of course, nothing new. We saw this in the ‘80s, when Katharine Hamnett turned environmental solidarity into a style choice with her signature slogan t-shirts. Vivienne Westwood built her brand on the theme of rebellion, and has now joined forces with the Ethical Fashion Initiative. Westwood hits the nail on the head with the slogan: “This is not charity, this is work.”
Now this marrying of social work and coveted fashion has turned into a style expression all of its own. Vivienne Westwood and brands such as Maiyet, Stella Jean, Edun, Raven & Lily, and a growing number of online ethically conscious emporiums such as Modavanti, Reve en Vert, Plumo, and Fashion Compassion, enable the consumer to make conscious choices without compromising on style. These brands and platforms offer added value through carefully curated and meaningful production sources, enabling the consumer to give back with their fashion choices – and pointing the way toward a new aesthetic.
Indeed, in a world where fashions from the past are perpetually rehashed into style mash-ups, it is the brands which let their suppliers inspire them that have the strongest edge. As a designer I like to start with the question: what if we let the social issue be a guiding light in our creative process?
Pants to Poverty, for example, has put humour into the serious business of mass-producing a humdrum item by addressing the “sweat shop” production issue. Through its business model, Pants to Poverty is supporting sustainable livelihoods, from organic cotton farming through to fair wages. Similarly, Made jewellery focuses on sustainability and positive change by empowering artisans and communities in Kenya. In Phnom Penh, Cambodia, Tonle Design employs women who sew innovative printed dresses using discarded jersey collected from the floors of garment factories.
Stella McCartney continues to come up with new material mixes and products while avoiding materials traditionally associated with luxury, like leather. Brands that upcycle, such as From Somewhere, Goodone and Christopher Raeburn, also have innovative signature looks because their starting point is to be resourceful with the waste created by the fashion industry. In doing so, they offer bespoke products, which is essentially what luxury is.
When I talk about my brand Emi & Eve’s Bullets to Beauty, I am often asked how I ended up recycling landmines and turning the metal into fashion accessories. By recycling bombshells found in the post-war landmine clean-up process in Cambodia, and combining it with weaving from a tsunami regeneration co-op in coastal Thailand, fashion can help artisans rebuild their lives. At the same time, it offers originality and innovation to customers. It demonstrates that a brand can enable the fashion-conscious consumer of today to help others live in freedom from fear. It’s this synergy that sparks the creative challenge in my inner artist.
These are just a few promising examples of the emerging harmony that is developing between design thinking and social-problem solving. This is not a trend. This is here to stay.
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
On the terrace of a tiny café in the foothills of the mountains surrounding Palma, a clutch of Mallorcans sit, smoking morning fags and warming themselves in the mildest of winter suns. In front of them, a party of pasty Britons disgorges from a van and teeters in cleated cycling shoes over to where half a dozen bikes are racked.
The biggest, a tall man with shoulders the width of a bull and thighs like two uncut Serrano hams, is clearly the alpha male; a smiling silverback of a cyclist. As he fiddles with his saddle, one of the smokers notices the logo on his bike, and nudges his neighbour. “Hoy!” he remarks with a confused grin.
Hoy means “today” in Spanish. It is less a name, more a call to arms, a salutation, a whoop, an expression of delight, a war cry. Here is no complication, no snarling (Cavendish) nor sniping (Wiggins), just an unambiguous one-syllable statement of intent. Hoy!
But then again, throughout his long career, which yielded a record six Olympic gold medals, there was always something utterly irreducible about watching Sir Chris Hoy sprint. It was raw, pure, simple. From the pedal grind of the pistol start in those vast, unturnable gears to his brutal acceleration and steam-train momentum, the bike’s frame quivering under the strain and torque. What terrible strength. What poise and control. But mostly, what legs!
The big man, now 38, is nearly two years into hyperactive retirement. Today’s Mallorcan mission is the launch of a new range of clothing bearing his name. He is joined by his business partner Nick Hussey, the dapper founder of cycling’s latest blue-chip brand, Vulpine. Hussey, bearded and sporting a subtle mohican, is frequently described as a hipster. But in fact he lives in a semi-detached house in Motspur Park, suburban Surrey, with his young family.
“How hipster can that be?” he protests, before adding: “I’m 41!”
“Hmmm.” Hoy is not convinced. “Methinks the man doth protest too much.”
Hussey, who made his money in the music video business, is an interesting counterpoint to Hoy. He is a bubbling brook of sentiment, enthusiasm and, on occasion, silliness. A promising amateur rider in his youth, his wide-eyed delight at working with a genuine living legend is easy to spot.
They both, in their differing ways, have shared the same remarkable journey that the British cycling scene’s been on, from obscurity to something approaching the mainstream.
But now, mainly because of overachievers like Hoy, the secret’s out. Cycling’s moved out of the closet and into the high street, with a proliferation of independent and franchised retailers getting in on the act. So Hoy’s new departure makes sense in this brave new world. I get the impression he’s thoroughly enjoying his dabble in the world of cut and cloth. After all, it was Hoy who found Hussey, not vice versa.
“We approached half a dozen potential partners, but though I wouldn’t want to big up Nick too much, there was only one brand that we were aiming for. Because it was the same values for the brand that we have; it was about inclusivity, about people enjoying themselves.”
The idea is pleasingly simple. Vulpine has been making everyday clothing for cycling: jackets that work on a bike but look like normal jackets, jeans that feel comfortable while you’re riding but still function as jeans. It is stuff that makes cyclists less of a visible oddity on our streets. Hoy’s new range of “performance” clothing has the same attitude. The quality is there, but none of the exclusivity.
As Hussey says: “I hate that sneering thing with the clothing and all the different kit. Do what you like.” Hoy agrees. “I think cycling can take itself a bit too seriously sometimes.”
So here we are, all riding up a mountain in Hoy Vulpine shorts and shirts, socks and caps. My top is a gentlemanly greyish green, with a Tabasco-sauce dash of red along the line of the zip. My casquette (a posh cycling term for cap) is lemon yellow, with the same trademark Hoy track band stripes that adorn the bikes he launched in 2013.
By the time we reach the wooded summit of the Coll d’Honor, the January sun feels suddenly strong through the pine trees. Hoy, effortlessly, has reached the top first, with a mock victory salute. I trail in, gasping. While we all recover, he removes his leg warmers. “Sun’s out. Time for Scottish skin.” We find ourselves surreptitiously glancing down at those famous knighted quads. They are still as overstated as they ever were.
Retirement has not changed him. When I ask him to break down his post-racing work schedule into a pie chart, he quickly gets lost in all its subdivisions and fractions: charity work, sponsors’ commitments, motivational speaking, the bike brand, the clothing brand, and a fully committed attempt to qualify as a racing driver for Le Mans 24 Hours (a day or two after our ride, he finishes second in a prestigious race at Ascari race track in Spain).
Then there’s the life-changing matter of his baby son Callum, who was born to Hoy and his wife Sarra 11 weeks premature in October. His iPhone is jammed with pictures of the young Hoy, who is clearly thriving, although as his father strikingly remarks: “If you go by the date he was conceived, he’s really only a month old now.” No sprinter’s thighs just yet, then, but plenty of time to build them up.
All clothes by HOY Vulpine are available at vulpine.cc and evanscycles.com.
To see the full range, go to lookbook.vulpine.cc/hoyvulpine-ss15
As the great and good of the film industry prepare to honour their peers at the Bafta awards, the pressure to achieve preened photogenic perfection for the big night out is greater than ever. And that’s not just for the leading ladies of the year’s cinematic blockbusters.
Across the country, women are agonising over wardrobe choices as they get ready for dates, dinners and drinks with the girls, pulling out all the sartorial stops in a bid to emulate the starlets who walk the red carpet during awards season. Where once a trusty little black dress might have been deemed adequate for a night on the town, a desire for ever more glamorous and accessible “occasionwear” is fuelling a boom for mass-market fashion brands.
Last week, online retailer Asos invited fashion editors to the unveiling of a new collection created for an “occasionwear hub”, due to launch on its website in mid-March. A selection of around 50 key pieces from the collection included embellished “crystal mesh” mini dresses, laser-cut prom dresses, floral floor-length gowns and evening jumpsuits designed for a new generation of glamour girls brought up on a daily diet of red-carpet images, celebrity selfies and American prom queens.
“A decade or more ago, the prom didn’t exist in Britain, but now schoolgirls here will save up for a pair of Manolos or Louboutins for their first big night out and want the statement dress to go with them,” says fashion historian Bronwyn Cosgrave. “Until recently you had to go to designer labels for something fabulous that was youthful and fun, because the high street didn’t cater well for that kind of evening or special occasion glamour. Now the more accessible mass-market retailers are buying into that heavily, to meet growing demand.”
With international retail sales of more than £950m last year, Asos has declared an annual sales target of £2.5bn by 2020, and is planning aggressive expansion of its ranges in a bid to meet this figure. It is pinning its hopes on the new occasionwear collection being a hit with style-savvy, budget-conscious customers.
“They admire the style of actresses like Dakota Johnson or Jennifer Lawrence, who do pretty and glam really well, in a fresh, youthful, vibrant way that our customers relate to,” says Asos head of design Leandra O’Sullivan. “This season, sales of floor-length gowns in our Salon collection were up 95% on last year, and in January embellished styles were up 51% on even their pre-Christmas peak, so we know we’re on the right track.
“We know young women love to dress up for a night on the town, a wedding, a day at the races or a work function, so we have really focused on creating accessible pieces with that ‘special occasion’ touch. Prices start at £65 and the most expensive pieces – beaded, embroidered styles in the red-carpet range – cost around £185.”
But Asos does not have the market for affordable high-octane glamour to itself. Another online boutique, Little Mistress, was founded recently to cater specifically for young women inspired by reality TV shows such as The Only Way is Essex and Made In Chelsea. It has been a runaway success.
“They sell perfect prom dresses and glitzy cocktail numbers to young women who want to ramp up the glamour,” says fashion consultant Erica Davies, a 38-year-old who buys her own occasionwear from Asos. “H&M’s limited edition Conscious collection has also quietly been making waves at fashion events and was worn on the Bafta red carpet three years ago by Hollywood A-lister Michelle Williams.”
The chattering classes’ favourite, Boden, has also expanded its portfolio of school-run staples to include some sell-out occasionwear styles, priced at a premium over its core collection. Over the festive season, it introduced floor-length, colour-blocked silk evening skirts at around £200, and its spring collection features gamine floral separates that are sure to prove popular at home counties weddings this summer.
There seems to be a direct correlation between this inclination to dress up and the more casual mood that has dominated workplace wardrobes and catwalk fashion for the past few years. Retailers are reporting soaring sales in the “loungewear” sector, with women clamouring for off-duty soft jersey harem pants and cashmere onesies, and the softening of office dress codes seems to be stimulating a desire to go for maximum impact when the opportunity arises.
And it’s not just younger fashionistas who are opting for sequins and satin; more mature shoppers are seeking a sophisticated take on occasionwear at labels such as Coast, where marketing manager Emma McKeever reports “remarkable growth in online sales over the past 12 months”.
In recent seasons, stylists on glossy magazines have fought over samples of Coast’s signature long, full evening skirt in a range of taffetas, jacquards and printed satins, and this gained the brand a profile in influential photo shoots and a platform for sales.
“The press, and customers, have fallen in love with those skirts, which we rework regularly in different fabrics,” says Coast’s creative director, Neil Hendy. “The re-emergence of the skirt as a high-fashion item gives women a foundation for her own look, teaming it with a sequin sweater, a leather jacket, a white shirt or a silk blouse. The look can be adapted for any age, from 16 to 60 and beyond, and for a range of occasions. It’s up to you how dressy you want to be, according to how you style it with accessories. We are focusing on separates as the way for women to make the occasionwear trend their own, in the way they put it together.”
Amid all the speculation over who will take home the Bafta for leading actress, the fashion world waits with bated breath to discover who will wear what on the red carpet tonight. The accolade of a place on the best-dressed lists is coveted by starlets, whose earning power and Hollywood bankability can be significantly increased by judicious wardrobe choices.
When Lupita Nyong’o won an Academy Award for her role in 12 Years A Slave last year, her acting credentials were sealed. But it was her wardrobe of pared-down, contemporary red-carpet attire that won her glossy magazine covers and lucrative advertising contracts, with Miu Miu and Lancôme.
Jennifer Lawrence famously tripped in her fairytale Dior gown at the 2013 Oscars, but the Paris fashion house turned the incident to her advantage, wooing the young actress to star in their ad campaigns.
With some high-profile British talent nominated for key awards tonight, London style watchers are hoping to see some homegrown designs on the red carpet. So far in this awards season, Felicity Jones has been wearing Dior, and Keira Knightley tends to favour Valentino and Chanel. So it could be down to Rosamund Pike to champion British-based designers such as Roksanda Ilincic, Thomas Tait, Emilia Wickstead, Mary Katrantzou or Jenny Packham.
Designer Josh Goot has announced his eponymous fashion label has been placed into voluntary administration, saying the move was necessary to save his 10-year-old business.
“The retail market has witnessed a prolonged downturn since the GFC in 2008 and we are proud that we have been able to sustain and grow the business throughout the challenging period, while manufacturing exclusively in Australia,” he told the Australian.
“We now need to take some time to restructure to protect the long-term interests of the brand and all involved.”
The fashion label is the latest casualty in a brutal Australian market. Other recent closures include Alannah Hill, Lisa Ho, Collette Dinnegan, Marnie Skillings and Kirrilly Johnson.
Insiders cite the influx of international high street brands and online fashion retailers, the crowded domestic market and the value of the Australian dollar as ongoing pressure for homegrown fashion brands.
Goot described the market as “challenging”. “We are (as a brand), I think, unique in the Australian landscape and that doesn’t necessarily make our experience easier, but I also think that it does give us a real future and that’s what we’re going to be working to secure.”
The label is currently stocked in standalone stores in Sydney and Melbourne and in department store David Jones. It also reportedly has 20 international stockists. Despite the label’s financial worries, the autumn/winter collection will land in stores in March, and production is reportedly under way for the spring/summer collection. Goot says he hoped the move would strengthen the label. “We’re confident that we can emerge from the voluntary administration as a better business.”
Known for his clean sculptural aesthetic, Goot has long been touted as one of Australian fashion’s hottest talents. His 2005 debut collection was awarded the Tiffany & Co young designer of the year award, and the Sydney-based designer has shown in London and New York.
The label enjoys a strong celebrity following with Cate Blanchett, Solange Knowles and Kim Kardashian having been photographed wearing his dresses at red carpet events. Last week, actress Mia Wasikowska chose a graphic floral dress from the pre-fall 2015 collection to wear to the Aacta awards. 
Josh Goot has been contacted for comment.
Cape Town’s long-established garment industry was severely damaged in the 1990s when the free market policies of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) opened South Africa’s economy to an influx of imported goods and competition from Asia.
The result was mass factory closures. According to Statistics South Africa, garment industry jobs fell from 220,000 in 2002 to 100,000 in 2011. Cape Town’s Salt River neighbourhood is now scattered with former garment factories converted into foreign-owned call centres or simply lying empty.
Now, however, the race is on to save the industry and Cape Town is emerging as a design capital and manufacturing hub with a refreshing difference – it has safe workplaces and a desire to share the stories of its garment workers.
A key driver of change is the South African Clothing and Textile Workers’ Union (SACTWU). Tired of retailers shipping millions of tonnes of clothes halfway round the world, SACTWU has a buy local policy. To promote this, the union runs shops that stock “Made in South Africa” clothing and is famous for its Spring Queen Pageant in which garment workers model clothes they have made.
Garment workers in South Africa are predominantly women, often single mothers and their family’s soul breadwinner. SACTWU states that 70-80% of garment workers are union members, which places the union in a strong position to negotiate for good conditions.
While the director of SACTWU’s research unit, Etienne Vlok, does not pretend factories are problem-free, he does describe them as good, safe workplaces. “Buy a garment with a Made in South Africa label and you can have peace of mind that the garment was made under good conditions,” Vlok says. “We want to use this as our competitive advantage.”
This desire is mirrored at the luxury end of the industry. The Cape Town Fashion Council represents approximately 300 designers nationwide, and CEO Bryan Ramkilawan emphasises Cape Town’s production quality: “We produce in an ethical way, we are not producing in a sweatshop environment.”
This ethos could be key to ending the factory closures. Ramkilawan points out that many of the designers showing at Cape Town Fashion Week have relatives who worked in the now-closed factories. Being so embedded in the community means their aim is “to create something that isn’t competing directly with cheap Chinese exports, but which is locally produced to empower people and which incorporates elements of South African traditional culture and design”.
It’s not easy, though. The problem Ramkilawan faces is that South Africa doesn’t have multi-brand stores to stock the collections of the people he represents, meaning they must seek markets overseas in places such as London and New York.
Along with the garment workers’ union and the Cape Town Fashion Council, there is another force driving change and environmental sustainability. Inspired by Cape Town’s place as World Design Capital 2014, and by the city’s Design Indabas, Cape Town’s young design community is devoted to design, sustainability and putting South Africa on the fashion map.
One such designer is Zaid Philander, founder of sustainable accessories brand I Scream & Red. He comes from a family of garment workers, many of whom lost their jobs in the late 1990s – a time he describes as horrible.
When he first learned to sew as a little boy, Philander’s feet couldn’t reach the sewing machine peddle and his sister had to devise a contraption from a crutch and a hosepipe that let him sew with his elbow. Some 20 years later the knowledge that “you don’t need to be of a certain height and have two arms and two legs to work a sewing machine” means that the majority of I Scream & Red’s employees are people with disabilities who work using adapted sewing machines. One employee is Zama Sonjika, who had both his legs amputated after an accident, but who now runs his own sewing business.
The neatly-constructed I Scream & Red bags are made from sample books, tents, PVC billboard banners and flags from the City of Cape Town 2010 FIFA World Cup. The bag straps are seatbelts recycled from the Cape Town car pound.
Philander rejects the idea that planet friendly fashion means “recycled hessian potato sacks” and people wearing “scratchy beige fabric”. Instead he argues that “you can have cutting-edge fashion at no cost to the earth and also do it in a responsible way – people in society need the work”.
For Philander, and perhaps for Cape Town, this means rejecting the global fashion model that prioritises cheap materials, immorally low wages and expanded distribution over product: “I believe that it is the worker who comes first, then your product is made and then everything else falls into place,” he says.
Back at the Cape Town Fashion Council, Ramkilawan reiterates the importance of fair production: “A chief part of our success is the story – you can track the garments, you can track who produced the garments, you can even visit the person producing the garments. You can steal the idea but you can’t steal the story.”
This article was amended on 3 February 2015. The original referred to Salt Rock, where it now says Salt River.
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox.
Couture ends today. From sequinned catsuits at Dior to male bridesmaids at Chanel, here are the highlights
The words the designer Raf Simons used in praise of his teams in the Christian Dior ateliers after the haute couture show on Monday afternoon were interesting: “They have no fear,” he said. The petites mains, the craftspeople of haute couture, are the keepers of the flame in high fashion. They are much lauded for their traditional skills, their long-suffering patience. The techniques handed down through generations, the hundreds of hours of close work behind the scenes, are championed each season.
To praise their fearlessness is rather different. And the choice of words is striking, in the context of Paris this month: whether consciously or not, Simons made a link between the workers’ spirit in the ateliers, and the spirit of the demonstrations on the streets of Paris after the terrorist attacks.
This is a slightly less far-fetched connection than it seems from a London perspective. The great Parisian fashion houses have a place in the city’s mythology and self-image, in a way which has no equivalent in any other capital. This week’s shows were haute couture, the highest echelon of fashion, a tier of the industry which – in contrast to the ready-to-wear catwalks that now happen everywhere from Reykjavik to Nairobi – takes place only in Paris. Haute couture is an expression of French national pride, and of Parisian self-belief.
Catwalk shows are months in the designing, planning and making. This week’s clothes were all conceived long before, rather than in reaction to, the events of the past few weeks. But the editing, staging and styling decisions that happen up until the last moment are hugely important in framing the message of a show. And at haute couture, with its five-figure price tags, almost nobody actually buys the clothes; it is the message that matters.
This was the boldest, bravest, most forward-looking week of haute couture shows Paris has seen in a while. Since Chanel saved seven specialist couture workshops from bankruptcy in the 1990s – an undoubtedly noble move, which preserved several hundred jobs, albeit also a smart strategic one that has elevated the Chanel brand to an unassailable role of the fairy godmother of fashion – the haute couture shows have been a kind of romantic poetry in thrall to these traditions. Haute couture houses, maddeningly coy about exactly how much the dresses cost, or exactly how many clients there are, have loved to shower reporters with statistics about hours: 300 hours’ work on this wedding dress, four hours per metre for this hand embroidery. All of which is undeniably impressive, but has begun to feel slightly unprogressive – Luddite, even – in its focus on repetitive manual labour, the patience and work ethic of the ateliers as somehow more worthy of praise than their technique or accomplishment.
This week, it felt as if ideas and imagination were what mattered. At Dior, Chanel and Giambattista Valli, the tenor of the haute couture – both in the clothes, and in the sets – was bolder and more daring than last season. The headcount of Hollywood celebrities was much lower than is usual for a fashion week that takes place in prime Oscar-dress-shopping time, an absence that some attributed to an unwillingness among American actors to travel to Paris. Perhaps as a result, play-it-safe red-carpet glamour was sidelined in favour of strong fashion pieces. At Schiaparelli, charismatic muse Farida Khelfa brought in Jean-Paul Goude – photographer of Kim Kardashian Breaks The Internet fame – to design a set that starred the French gospel choir Les Cherubins serenading the audience from Juliet balconies set into the walls above their heads. The subversive, surreal codes of Schiaparelli were unmistakable in a print of gloved hands appearing to fasten a trompe-l’oeil embroidered bracelet at the back of a dress. A bracelet was made of seamstress’s pins, the gold points gleaming next to but somehow not piercing the skin. An alarming piece to wear and, beneath the choir above, a small, silent paean to fearlessness.
With bare midriffs and low-slung hip belts, Karl Lagerfeld flirted with bad taste this season. Then there were outsized picture hats swathed in black tulle – for very glamorous beekeepers in mourning? – and Cara Delevingne-ish beanies encrusted with roses. Under the catwalk, 300 engines powered a set of paper flowers that bloomed and coloured as the show unfolded. Where past Chanel shows have referenced the formal elegance of Versailles, this time the garden was allowed to run wild.
The setting for the Christian Dior show – a circus tent of white scaffolding with pink carpets and mirrored walls, and a catwalk snaking around the walls – was designed to disorientate. The same went for clothes that took elements of the 1950s, 60s and 70s and melded them together in an impossible dream sequence of ideas. The loopy jumpsuits were super trippy, while transparent plastic duster coats printed with delicate, inky florals and skintight latex boots in hallucinogenic shades were weird – and, weirdly, gorgeous.
It was, for the most part, glamour-as-usual on the Versace catwalk. But a bold attitude was brought by Donatella’s choice of models for the finale: the 90s supermodels Eva Herzigova, 41, and Amber Valletta, who, at 40, rocks a fabulous undercut. The skintight, flared jumpsuits had a touch of David Bowie about them – a trend echoed the next day in psychedelic swirls and sequinned stripes at Dior’s Moonage Daydream show.
“Elsa’s pioneering spirit” was the theme at the third catwalk show for the relaunched Schiaparelli brand. A hot pink catwalk was reflected in a box-of-mirrors set, with surprises to be spotted from all angles: poker-chip buttons fastening elegant silk trousers, constellations traced across eveningwear, and embroidered bows bursting into three-dimensions, as if the dresses themselves were coming to life.
This collection was a bold statement of intent, from a designer not content with the (lucrative) position of being the fairytale wedding-dress designer of the moment. Taking its queue from the Metropolitan Museum’s Impossible Conversations show, which imagined dialogue between Elsa Schiaparelli and Miuccia Prada, Valli imagined a conversation-in-clothes between Coco Chanel and Janis Joplin, two wardrobe rule-breakers. With cocktail dresses layered over houndstooth trousers, it was a hymn to sartorial irreverence.
Considering that Christian Dior’s most recent financial results showed a 13.4% sales rise to €747m (£560m), in the first six months of last year, we may assume that the designer Raf Simons had free rein to show Monday’s haute couture collection in any Paris venue he chose.
So it is worth taking a moment to consider why he chose to erect an indoor building site – a freshly painted, plushly carpeted one – in the garden of a shuttered 18th-century museum in central Paris.
Since arriving at Dior in 2012, Simons has been on a mission to make the historic house relevant and contemporary. This show venue was a very New Dior conceit, paying respect to the rich history of Paris – and then immediately deconstructing it. Arriving at the gates of the Musée Rodin, currently closed for refurbishment, guests first of all had to navigate the security gates that are a new and sober fixture on the Paris fashion week scene. (In an attempt to maintain standards of glamour, Dior had replaced the grey plastic trays in which handbags are placed to be screened with pristine white boxes.)
Once cleared, guests walked through the shell of the museum – elegant but tired, with the parquet under wraps and the tall windows shuttered – and along the gravel paths to the end of the long formal gardens, where a giant white box was marked, simply, “Dior”. Inside, the venue revealed itself to be a spiral of glossy white scaffolding, with a catwalk snaking upwards in circles, carpeted in soft pink and walled with mirrors.
A utopian construction site, in the grounds of a historic museum which will soon be refurbished and reborn: that, right there, was the key brand message of this haute couture show.
The Dior woman, says Simons, is both “exquisitely decorated and disruptive”. The clothes were a mischievous layering of past and present: not simply nostalgic or straightforwardly futuristic, but rather a 1960s vision of the 21st century.
Transparent plastic rain macs were self-consciously sci-fi, but cut with a retro, swingy line and demure bracelet-length sleeves. A tattoo-printed long-sleeved mesh bodysuit worn under a short-sleeved shift gave a double-take-worthy effect, as if a prim young 1950s wife was sporting two full sleeves of tattoos.
This was a world where not even a ponytail – that simplest, most girlish of hairstyles – was what it seemed.
Look closely, and you noticed that the hair on the models’ scalps ended where it wrapped around the top of a small metal ring suspended from the back of their heads, while the hair hanging down their backs was an entirely separate portion of fake hair, attached to the bottom of the metal ring. It seemed a neat joke about how the level of beauty and elegance achieved on the haute couture catwalks requires from the viewer a suspension of disbelief.
“Periods of time are conflated,” Simons explained of the collection. He berated himself for having previously been guilty of “always thinking of the future … I was always anti-romanticising the past. But the past can be beautiful too. There is a sense of the romance of the 50s, with the experimentation of the 60s and the liberation of the 70sin the collection.”
David Bowie’s swooping Moonage Daydream played on the soundtrack, and a series of sequinned and striped catsuits referenced the Yansai Yamamoto outfits that Bowie wore on his 1973 Aladdin Sane tour, seen in the 2013 V&A exhibition.
The boldness of the fashion message was echoed in what was notably absent from a collection beamed around the world just as actors and stylists are starting to pick out dresses for Oscar night. Three strapless, full-skirted gowns were the only classic eveningwear pieces in a 55-piece lineup of knitted all-in-ones, full-length latex boots and psychedelic stripes. This was cutting edge, not comfort zone.
The collection with which Donatella Versace opened the Paris haute couture shows on Sunday night was sexy and glamorous.
The dresses were long and form-fitting, with slim naked slivers peeled off across the body, as if Donatella had attacked her gowns with a lemon zester.
The models included, star of the original Wonderbra posters, along with fellow 90s name Amber Valletta and current Vogue cover girl Jourdan Dunn.
Hollywood’s power mother-daughter duo, Kate Hudson and Goldie Hawn, sat in the front row.
And in case anyone was still puzzling over the general message, Marvin Gaye’s Sexual Healing accompanied the finale.
Versace is entirely uncomplicated, which is either the label’s strength or weakness, depending on how you take your brands.
It has staked an unrivalled claim on the public consciousness: ask the average consumer to close their eyes and picture a Versace dress, and the image they see is likely to be sharper than for any other brand.
Everyone knows what Versace stands for. This strength and simplicity of image are commercial gold, in the marketing of perfume and makeup.
But for those who like their pop culture with a wink, the absence of irony in the Versace world makes it problematically unsophisticated.
Yet in the 15 years that Donatella Versace has helmed the family label – through some troubled financial rapids, into calm and buoyant waters – the sheer force of her personality and determination has added an emotional power to her signature sucker-punch dresses.
It is worth repeating the fact: Donatella Versace opened the Paris haute couture shows.
The highest, most elite branch of the fashion industry, long dominated by French men, has given pride of place to an Italian woman who has survived personal trauma and drug addiction but now, at 59, is going strong.
Among the limp fairytale narratives of haute couture – where, to judge by the dresses, female fulfilment is a matter of embroidery and weddings – the Jackie Collins plot of the Versace empire is compelling.
Before the show, Donatella Versace described the collection as being “about cut, and the curves of a woman’s body … when we started the collection, I said I wanted no straight lines at all. Every seam is curved”.
The show opened with two black trouser suits which could have come from no other design house: so tight that the spotlights caught each hipbone separately, as the models stalked the catwalk.
Every curve was lovingly highlighted and flashes of skin winked from cut-out shoulders, from plunging necklines, even from split-front flared trousers.
After the briefest nod to daywear, in the form of one long-sleeved dress, the collection segued into a masterclass of red carpet dressing guaranteed to suck up the oxygen of publicity at any event.
There was, as Donatella promised, not a straight seam on the catwalk – and the winding, undulating, sinuous cut combined with an elongated silhouette gave a mesmerising effect of cat-stretched hourglass curves.
There was an air of decadence and mystery at the Maison Margiela autumn/winter show in Paris on Friday, the label’s first menswear collection since John Galliano was installed as creative director.
Invitations had the words “call me” scrawled in messy handwriting on the back, like an end-of-night promise. The venue, 19th-century ballroom Salle Wagram, was filled with smoke and dimly lit in red, evoking an upmarket knocking shop. Fittingly, in the 1800s, it was the site of debauched parties thrown by bohemian French aristocracy. But on this occasion, the guests wondered, who was the host? Before the show, it remained unclear whether Galliano himself was actually responsible for the menswear collection that was about to be presented.
Galliano is currently being rehabilitated in the fashion world, four years after a drunken, antisemitic rant led to him being fired from Dior. Earlier this month, the 54-year-old designer presented his first couture womenswear collection for Margiela in front of an audience of powerful friends (Anna Wintour, Kate Moss) and significant new ones (Rabbi Barry Marcus of London’s Central synagogue). Though notes distributed at the show were typically enigmatic, the press office told the Guardian that this collection had been created by Margiela’s in-house designers without Galliano’s involvement, with the designer’s full reign beginning with womenswear in March.
Still, the rumour mill turned. Would a notorious workaholic such as Galliano really be able to take a back seat? The styling of the show certainly suggested the team had been influenced, consciously or not, by the brand’s new figurehead. Clothes were glitzy and louche, with models wearing leather macintoshes, cuban heels and glittery Lurex jumpers. There was an explicit 1970s theme, an unusual move for Margiela, a house that does not usually refer to specific periods in its design. There were plenty of Margiela tropes also on show, too: edges were unravelled, hems were unfinished and models’ hands were enigmatically dipped in paint. At the end, no one took a bow and, unusually, the backstage area was closed to the press. Was Galliano even in the building? Either way, his ears will have been burning.
On Thursday, the American designer Rick Owens sent models down the catwalk in peep-hole outfits that subtly showed their genitals. The usually unshockable fashion crowd – inured to the sight of bare bottoms and nipples before lunch – were surprised and perplexed; some of the front row were unsure of what they had seen even as they left the venue.
As fashion stunts go, this was quite something. It was, as one editor cheekily described it, a “grower”. Unlike so many Instagram-friendly moments, painstakingly orchestrated on the catwalk but often swiftly forgotten after receiving a few likes, this one seemed designed to last.
It wasn’t until the evening that gossip filtered through, news broke and the designer’s name was trending on Twitter, with #dickowens becoming an Instagram hashtag. Even those who have been rolling their eyes at the fuss, arguing that there is nothing inherently shocking about male body parts, still found themselves deep in the debate.
But what did it mean? According to Rick Owens’ official announcement, the show was about “compression” and “pressure built-up in silent vessels filled with energy” and “the strain of preserving reason under extreme pressure”. The collection also “fetishises the nautical peacoat and cable-knit sweater”, apparently – a line some editors reacted to by asking: “Wow – were there peacoats? I didn’t notice.”
• The standfirst on this article was amended on 27 January 2015 to better reflect the contents of the story.
It’s official. Alessandro Michele – Gucci’s head accessories designer – is to become creative director at the Italian megabrand.
Michele takes up the position left vacant by Frida Giannini, the label’s creative director for 11 years. Giannini’s departure, along with that of her partner, chief executive Patrizio di Marco, was announced in December. The pair were due to work until Gucci’s autumn/winter runway show in February, but this month the company confirmed that Giannini had already left.
Giannini’s departure had been linked with falling sales. Traditionally, Gucci makes up half of all sales at its parent company Kering, which also owns Balenciaga, Stella McCartney and Saint Laurent. In 2013, Gucci experienced the slowest growth in three years – with like-for-like revenues up only 0.2% from the previous year in the final quarter. By contrast, sales at Saint Laurent rose 28%.
Rumours about Giannini’s replacement have been swirling for weeks. New York designer Joseph Altuzarra and Riccardo Tisci of Givenchy were linked to the job, as was Giannini’s predecessor Tom Ford, who had huge success at the brand from 1994 to 2004. That delicious possibility now seems like wishful thinking from an industry thirsty for gossip (an insider from Ford’s eponymous label was quoted as saying there was “no truth” to the suggestion).
Michele’s name was strongly mooted, too, partially because Gucci has a history of hiring from the inside. Michele has been Giannini’s deputy since 2011, just as Giannini was Ford’s deputy in the noughties. The biggest clue that the fingerprints of a Gucci insider were already being seen at the brand came on 19 January, at the presentation of the label’s autumn/winter menswear collection in Milan. The brand was officially rudderless, so fashion critics would have expected the show to concentrate on house classics, rather than presenting new ideas. In fact, the aesthetic had been entirely overhauled, with Gucci’s customary jet-set glitz eschewed for thoughtful 1970s-influenced androgyny – men wore berets and pussybow blouses. The collection received a standing ovation from the front row.
Italian fashion is often judged to be old-fashioned and – some would say – backward-looking, with only Prada, of the big design houses, credited for creating agenda-setting, off-kilter wearables. Is Gucci now attempting to take a slice of that edgier pie? For an answer to that question, all eyes will be on Gucci’s autumn/winter womenswear catwalk show in February.
Another Italian superbrand made news on Wednesday, as Versace named Italian-Belgian designer Anthony Vaccarello – famous for his edgy, highly revealing frocks – creative director of its secondary line, Versus Versace. Vaccarello presented a highly successful capsule line for the Versace offshoot in September at New York fashion week, following in the footsteps of Christopher Kane and JW Anderson. He will make his debut in his new role in February.
The fashion industry has never been short of rock-star designers: Yves Saint Laurent setting flashbulbs popping in Studio 54; John Galliano swaggering down the catwalk for post-show bows at Dior. But what does the designer as rock star look like in the Instagram age?
One possibility is presented by Olivier Rousteing, 28-year-old creative director of Balmain. Rousteing certainly has a face for social media – the sort of features the rest of us fail to achieve even when we suck our cheeks in and apply filters. He puts them to good use on his Instagram feed, where almost a million followers get a daily glimpse of the Balmain lifestyle: glitzy shots backstage at catwalk shows; pictures of parties on Dubai beaches with impossibly beautiful, sometimes famous, friends.
Rousteing’s catwalk shows have become frenzied fashion “moments”. At the unveiling of his spring/summer collection in September, men in suits jostled for seats while Kim Kardashian and Kanye West were blinded by the lights of a scrum of paparazzi from the front row.
In person, Rousteing is every bit as chiselled as his Instagram persona (is there such a thing as selfie resting face?), although more softly spoken, sincere and thoughtful than that image might suggest. Dressed from head to toe in black (Cheap Monday jeans, a Ralph Lauren cashmere sweater, fashion’s regulation-issue beanie), he speaks in elegant, French-accented English peppered with the occasional Valley girl phrase (his parents are “like, literally” so proud of him) and conversation veers from a detailed analysis of Cristóbal Balenciaga’s technical skills to the restorative post-party properties of McDonald’s food.
As well as his youth and beauty, Rousteing stands out for being a black designer in the top creative role at a storied design house. This puts him in a category of one in fashion, an industry that, “for the most part”, he says, “is playing the same game with the same people”. While many designers are criticised for casting mainly white models in their shows, the “Balmain army”, as Rousteing calls them, are always ethnically diverse. He believes the rest of the industry is missing out if it fails to follow suit. “I think it’s because the same people from the 1980s are still on top,” he says. “If they started to go out on the street more, and see how the business really is and who is actually spending money, they would realise that diversity is what helps fashion to still exist.”
Rousteing’s backstory has a fairytale quality: he was born in France and lived in an orphanage until he was one and a half, when he was adopted by a white couple from Bordeaux. His mother was an optician, his father a port manager, and he says his childhood was “perfect, amazing”, very French, very traditional and conflict-free until his late teens, when he realised he didn’t want to become an international lawyer, as his parents had hoped, and moved to Milan to break into fashion. He apprenticed with Roberto Cavalli from the age of 18, stayed for five years (“Italian brands show you – with the money and the power that they have – that they can get everything really quick and really fast. I loved what I learned from them but I think I left because there was a side of their glam that I was no longer into,” he says), then worked under Christophe Decarnin at Balmain.
Decarnin famously dragged Balmain kicking and screaming into the noughties, working with the super-stylist Emmanuelle Alt to transform the label from an off-radar traditional couture house to the toast of the French Vogue set. Known for extreme, highly expensive pieces – ripped, crystal-embellished jeans; biker jackets with spike-shaped shoulder pads – Decarnin’s designs were copied on high streets throughout the world. At the tail end of the hectic period of “Balmania”, he suddenly left the company, and his replacement was a wild card – his right-hand man, Rousteing, then 25 years old, practically a zygote as French fashion houses go.
Rousteing puts his ascent down to ambition, a competitive streak and a workaholic nature: “I always push myself. I want to be first in everything. I want everything fast and I can’t wait.” His drive, he says, “comes from my birth. I was born in an orphanage, so I feel like anything is possible – there are no limits. When you come from nowhere you feel like the world belongs to you.”
“Obviously it was a bit scary,” he continues, “but until you are on the catwalk saying thank you to 500 people and seeing Anna Wintour in the front row you don’t know what [the pressure] is like. Honestly, I think my first collection was really pure. It wasn’t until the end of the show, when I had to go and thank everyone, that I realised my life was going to change; that it’s me under the spotlight. You realise that being an image of the house, as a creative director, is very different to being a designer.”
Under Rousteing, Balmain is still about high-octane glamour – his most famous creations include form-fitting dresses, embellished with the patterns of a Fabergé egg – and he says his vision for the customer is one of confidence. Even when the skin is covered, he says, “Balmain is not about hiding, it’s about showing.” Though this idea is somewhat at odds with the androgynous, understated silhouette that has captivated much of fashion in recent years, it certainly appeals to the young, international and moneyed. Balmain has its eyes on expansion – key markets include London, the bestseller, Italy, China, South Korea and the Middle East – with a stock market flotation the eventual goal. The opening of Balmain’s first European flagship store, in South Audley Street, Mayfair, at the end of January, is a significant part of this plan.
The ideal customer, says Rousteing, is someone like his friend – now also a Balmain campaign star – Kim Kardashian. “She is insanely beautiful, smart, confident, a business woman. I love also that she is not a typical American. She has Armenian origins, she is with Kanye, who is black, and she has a mixed-race daughter. For me, that is how modern couples are.” Kardashian and West are not universally adored by the fashion-loving public, many of whom flooded social media with complaints when the pair appeared on the cover of Vogue last year. This snobbery exists, he believes, because “they don’t understand that this is the new world. They will understand in three years. But it’s going to take time.”
Rousteing is obsessed with the modern, the fresh, the new. His most recent collection was themed around censorship, and featured transparent dresses with glittering black panels across models’ chests. It was partially inspired by Rihanna, who had been banned from Instagram for six months for posting explicit pictures. Though some fashion journalists criticised this concept – suggesting that Rousteing was reflecting pop culture rather than moving it on – he sees depth in the theme: “I’m not acting like a teenager and saying: ‘Oh my God, social media is really important.’ It is more that, as a business person, I see that Instagram is the new way of selling and of communicating. So, as a business person, I was wondering, what are the limits of social media? What can we communicate? It was important for me to show the limits of what you can show and what you can’t show.” And if you still don’t get it? Fashion’s most powerful millennial is confident that you will do, eventually.
Lidl’s fashion prowess knows no bounds: ahead of Burns night on Sunday, the budget supermarket has started selling kilts. The viscose rayon mix skirt costs £29.99 and is part of a collection that includes a pleather sporran for £10 and a haggis for 99p.
Lidl first piloted the design ahead of last summer’s Commonwealth games. This “proto-kilt”, which was three yards shorter and £10 cheaper, sold out almost immediately. The new line has been rolled out in time for this weekend’s celebrations, and the collection is already close to being sold out in both London and Scotland.
But would a true Scotsman wear it? The kilt comes in at the requisite eight yards long, making it legit enough. It’s just the tartan that is causing a minor furore. The design – a muted, forgettable palette of greys, greens and blues – borrows freely from various, disparate tartans. Lidl claims it’s Highland Grey. According to the House of Tartan, it “resembles” Highland Granite. Brian Wilton of the Scottish Tartans Authority says: “It’s not a tartan I recognise”.
There are no hard and fast rules when it comes to copyrighting a tartan, and most of the fashion houses mock up their own to avoid any copyright issues. There are around 11,000 registered and unregistered tartans knocking around, and about 120 new ones are created every year, so it’s nigh on impossible to keep tabs on every single design – it’s basically a free-for-all. Still there is a danger in these “pseudo” tartans “devaluing the genre” explains Wilton. “The problem is technology – there’s a lot of new software out there, which means anyone can design a tartan.”
There is an upside to the rise of the fakers. This renewed boom in tartan – over the past 12 months, the design has been a mainstay at Céline and Calvin Klein, and will be one of the key autumn/winter 2015 trends in menswear, thanks to Topman Design – is having “a demonstrable effect” on Scotland’s tourist industry, as well as the fashion world. Wilton helped design one used exclusively at Brooks Brothers which increased sales by £25m overseas. Why? “People in Asia love tartan.”
Wilton is loth to criticise Lidl too strongly – “it’s probably innocent enough” – and says, as a rule, if they see a rogue tartan design, they just suck it up or send a polite letter to the manufacturer. If an amateur designs a tartan for, say, their wedding? “We just grit our teeth. No one wants to hear their new baby is ugly.”
So, apparently flares are back this season. Can we now all officially laugh at the fashion industry?
It is true that some designers are trying to convince people to buy flares again, which everyone knows is a sign of imminent apocalypse. But, on the bright side, it means we can all enjoy the sight of fashion magazines contorting themselves into advanced yoga positions as – loyal to their advertisers like a dog is loyal to an immoral master – they attempt to pretend that flares are G-R-E-A-T. Look out for darling phrases like this:
Adorable. I do rather love fashion magazines for the way they simply parrot whatever designers tell them to: “You know those shoes we told you to buy five months ago? We told you they were “essential’ to your life? Well, they are now officially DISGUSTING and you need to buy THESE shoes. They’re essential, you know!” Like I say, I love it, but I’ve never really understood it. I get that fashion magazines need advertisers to survive. But film magazines, say, are allowed to give bad reviews, and the studios will still advertise in them. The only negative words you’ll ever see in a fashion magazine are ones used for styles from (ew!) last season. I just don’t get why fashion brands demand total obeisance from magazines in a way no other industry does, or why fashion magazines give it. My incomprehension might explain why I got banned from at least half a dozen designers’ shows when I used to cover them, but that’s another story.
Anyway, this is not a fashion magazine, so I can say with ringing certainty that flares are disgusting. Ooh, the freedom of expression is a delicious thing, isn’t it people? So tangy, but sweet, too, with a pleasant kick of righteousness. Of course flares are horrible: you know it, I know it and anyone in possession of the power of sight knows it. That the fashion industry is trying to convince people to buy them is not a sign that it is laughable, or even wrong, though. No one ever said that fashion is there to make people look good. This is a surprisingly common misunderstanding, leading to that perennial staple in tabloids, the genre I call “HA HA WHAT?!?!?!” journalism. This is when hacks laugh at how STOO-PID the models look in fashion shows: “God, look at the girl wearing a plank of wood on her head!!!! Does the designer think that looks good??!?!?!??” No, they don’t. They think it looks different. Style is the art of looking good; fashion is the endeavour to look different from everyone else while simultaneously looking exactly the same as anyone who follows fashion. It’s sort of like being in a cult, but with less food. So, going by that rubric, flares are perfectly in tune with fashion’s USP. After all, unless your social group consists of Bee Gees tribute groups, they’ll certainly make you different. Not good, mind – but different.
I think the real question to ask here is what other kinds of trousers a designer should advocate instead of flares. Because, the truth is, it’s very tricky to do anything different with trousers without making them look ridiculous, and designers need to do different things or people will just keep wearing the same stuff they wore last season, and what would be the point of that? You can do LOADS to jazz up a dress and still keep it wearable. Trousers? Not so much. Nothing dates a film more specifically than the kinds of trousers the actors are wearing. Really bad bootcut jeans? The 90s! High-cut jeans that flatter absolutely no one? The 80s! In fact, if you ever want to freak yourself out about your own wardrobe, imagine what your kids and grandkids will wear to early-21st-century-themed costume parties. Two words: skinny jeans. (Two more words: Ugg boots.) “God!” they’ll all cry, looking at one another and crying with laughter, “Look at these stupid tight trousers made out of lycra that give everyone a muffin top! Can you believe our ancestors used to wear them?
Flares are not proof of the inherent ridiculousness of the fashion industry. No, not at all. Rather, they are an expression of despair from designers. “For God’s sake!” those flares are wailing. “What do you WANT from us?! Clothes have existed for multiple millennia – there’s only so much you can do with the damn things. With trousers, there are high waists, low waists, wide-legged, skinny-legged – and we’ve done all that. So, do you have any other suggestions?! If so, feel free to send them to us on a postcard. In the meantime, here are some flares. Knock yourselves out!”
This should be your reaction every time fashion designers make something ridiculous, such as flares: not laughter, not anger – just pity. Pity for these poor souls who know that no one, really, is going to buy a £2,000 onesie, but they make one anyway because, well, they need to pad out their collection, and this will make the front pages, right? Even if it’s just the front page of the Daily Mail, accompanied by an article by Angry Columnist Woman about how bad fashion is terrible for humankind. At least it’s something, right? Right? That sound you hear, it’s the sound of a designer gently weeping into his almond macchiato.
• Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
This weekend at the autumn/winter 2015 menswear shows in Milan, the main points could have been summed up by looking at a triumvirate of brands: Dolce & Gabbana, Versace and Prada. It is these three big hitters – and their sometimes wildly different points of view – that set the agenda for Italian menswear and beyond.
Dolce & Gabbana was up first, with its show on Saturday afternoon, and the more social-media-minded of observers would have seen the theme coming. The label, which has been using the #dgfamily hashtag on Instagram in the week leading up to the show, started proceedings by opening a pair of red velvet curtains to reveal a tableau of real-life families. With an age range from two to 82, a throne, and the cast kitted out in ballgowns, hotpants and miniature suits, the effect was of a very glamorous family-reunion portrait. 
Models walked out in front of the families, with a collection broadly based on that theme. Typically opulent, with brocade, fur and silk all featuring heavily, Dolce & Gabbana’s collections are always rich in detail. Sweatshirts came with photoreal family portraits on them, or the phrase “amore per sempre”, while some embroidered pieces used the idea of family crests. The tagging of tops with the “dgfamily” hashtag was probably over-egging things a little but a subtler message did emerge. With casting that ran from teenagers to fiftysomethings, three consecutive looks neatly demonstrated Dolce & Gabbana’s position now. A young man wore the polo shirt, fitted pants and flat cap of a fifties barista; a thirtysomething had on a neat blazer and carried a day bag for work; a 50-odd-year-old sported a more decadent double-breasted suit. What did they convey? This is a brand that can be worn and bought across generations of Italian men.
If Dolce & Gabbana enjoys taking signifiers of national identity and adding its brand voice to the conversation, Versace concentrates on its own dynasty. The world of Versace is where Donatella finds her collection each season, with the aim to reinvent the brand wheel, or at least evolve it, each season. Contrasting from a spring collection that was full of pattern, bold colours and a 1980s aesthetic, this was relatively pared-back – for a brand that loves bling, anyway. The set was industrial, with scaffolding spelling out “Versace” as guests walked in, and models reaching the catwalk via a set of metal stairs. The house “codes” were still there, however, in the form of giant-sized, Instagram-ready medusa head made of scaffolding front row centre above the catwalk.
The clothes stuck to a masculine colour palatte – grey, brown, ivory, blue, black – and created a silhouette that played with volume and rigour. Knitted joggers – described by their designer as “molto sexy” – were paired with slouchy knee-length cardigans, and Oxford bag-style trousers contrasted with a nipped-in blazer. Always with an eye on men with expensive tastes, a fur coat with hood would have been just the thing for an evening in Aspen. Donatella explained that this look – part sport, part louche – was always in the Versace DNA. “Silhouettes, sensuality and fabrics are Versace,” she said. “It was about going back to the start to make a medusa for the next century.” She argued that this was the way for her to inject new ideas into her brand. “Neutral colours are difficult for me,” she said “but you have to change. I hope I have done that by going back to the core of the brand. You can’t always go back to the same thing.” Wise words from a brand matriach – she manages to make things just different enough each time out.
Prada’s Sunday night show spurned any idea of family or convention. Instead, designer Miuccia Prada did exactly what she wanted – as always. Despite these being the men’s shows, her collection featured an almost equal number of male and female models. It was shown in a set that looked like a space ship, all low ceilings, corridors of shredded chrome and anterooms. The clothes concentrated on the idea of “uniforms” – both explicitly in school kilts and air steward jackets but also conceptually. One uniform – that presumably of the office worker – was in focus with macs, briefcases and a work-friendly colour palette of grey, navy and black. Sounds boring, perhaps, but was anything but. And that’s why Prada wins every time. She is the queen of Milan – and worldwide – fashion.
The fact that Milan’s latest fashion week is for menswear is a mere detail for Miuccia Prada. Her autumn/winter 2015 show on Sunday evening, always the agenda-setting highlight of the schedule, had an almost equal split between men’s and women’s looks.
It follows two seasons where a few female models featured in the men’s show but upped the womenswear count significantly. Asked for the reason after the show, she said: “When I think about men, I also think about clothes for women. I describe these clothes as another point of view.”
Not one to let convention get in the way of an idea, Prada just showed clothes for both. In Prada’s world, gamechanging is as simple as that.
In an uncharacteristically revelatory mood, this move was announced with show notes on each seat. That is a rarity at a Prada show, where the audience is usually on their own in figuring out the thoughts of one of fashion’s biggest influencers each season. The notes declared this show as an opportunity to “measure what genders share, what they take from each other”.
The collection wasn’t about wearing each other’s clothes, however. Instead of the hackneyed boyfriend aesthetic for women, and androgyny for men, Prada looked to uniforms, a type of clothing where designs for men and women intentionally mirror each other, rather than borrow. Largely navy, black and grey, the collection featured double-breasted jackets with a naval influence, kilts for women like a school uniform and suits for men that had something of the sixties air steward about them.
The winning uniform, however, was one more familiar: that of the office worker at rush hour. Each model carried a work bag of some description, and the mac, a commuter staple, was worn by both genders.
There were then typical Prada details to add an off-kilter feel: drooped grosgrain ribbons on dresses, pineapple ponytails for women, shoes with moulded platforms and the cuff of a neat sleeve pulled up to reveal the lining.
The set was hardly literal either. It resembled a spaceship rather than an office. The audience sat in a series of anterooms with low ceilings, corridors with chrome mesh and photo wallpaper of a Milky Way pattern. Prada herself compared it to a nightclub – a comparison made all the more appropriate through a soundtrack of eighties electro.
The designer, wearing a kilt, referred to a “uniform, a strictness” as inspiration and said she refined the clothes down to the essential pieces: “You edit and you edit and all you are left with is the black and blue and grey.”
Except, that was, for a rogue plaid coat towards the end. “No one wanted to put it in but I was fixated,” she revealed. “I like some mistakes.” The addition of womenswear into the men’s collection isn’t one such mistake, however. Prada suggested that this dual gender show will continue at her shows during the menswear season, and that these pieces will be available to buy in addition to the existing womenswear collections.
An eye for new product categories comes at a good time for the brand. In the nine months to December 2014, net profits for the Prada Group dropped by 27.6% to £282.15m.
Analysts have said that is down to less consumer spending, and a drop in tourism in Europe. Leather goods, traditionally a core part of Prada’s business, were particularly affected, with a 6% decrease in sales. In response to this, the brand plans to produce more bags with lower price points, at around the £1,000 mark. A new Prada perfume will also be released later this year.
Salvatore Ferragamo, the Italian luxury group that made shoes for Marilyn Monroe and handbags for Margaret Thatcher, ended 2014 on a high, the company’s boss said.
Speaking at the Milan stock exchange, where Ferragamo was showing its autumn/winter 2015 menswear collection, chief executive Michele Norsa said December sales were “even better than our expectations”.
“We closed 2014, which was an eventful year with a lot of volatility, with a very strong end of the year,” he said, according to Reuters.
The Florentine fashion house, known for its classic sensibility, saw a 4.6% increase in sales in the first nine months of 2014 to €957m (£730m).
Norsa dismissed concerns about deflation in the eurozone, where prices fell in December for the first time in five years. “What is more important is consumer confidence,” he said.
Last week, Swiss luxury goods group Richemont revealed that a crackdown on corruption in China and pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong had dampened demand for its watches and jewellery. But Ferragamo has been insulated from slowing demand in China by its large presence in global airports, as more travellers go shopping to kill time. Norsa said he expected that travel retail would continue to drive growth in 2015.
Sam Taylor-Wood’s adaptation of the bestseller is not yet in cinemas but there were 50 shades of grey on the Calvin Klein catwalk at Milan’s menswear fashion week on Sunday afternoon.
The autumn/winter 2015 collection by Italo Zucchelli, Calvin Klein’s creative director, was inspired by the colour palette of black and white movies. Shades included slate, dove, granite and charcoal with touches of black and white. This allowed the designer to play, instead, with texture and cut. Suiting was embossed with cheetah patterns, and the gleam of PVC played off textured knitwear. Cuts were either loose – oversized drop-shouldered overcoats – or skintight. A section of the show introduced a cropped, fitted bomber jacket, worn with high-waisted trousers, a harder sell away from the catwalk.
What Zucchelli excels at is finding a formula for a season and showing it from every angle – something that makes sense in menswear, an arena where tweaks to tried-and-tested formulas trump seasonal overhaul. This show was repetitive – there were five versions of the PVC trousers and jumper combination – but it didn’t feel samey. The looks worked as subtly different studies of one idea, a technique that makes sense for a brand that had its roots in minimalism.
The designs with commercial potential also had a uniform aspect. Most models wore hiking boots and had a neat, slicked-back hair style. While Zucchelli has explored a nineties-influenced sports aesthetic in recent collections – neoprene sweatshirts with the logos of the brands perfumes Obsession and Escape were a hit last winter – this felt more work than play.
An overcoat worn over a suit with a fine-knit mohair sweater and white T-shirt was a recurring theme. It was almost futuristic with Zucchelli’s precise cuts but, broken down, the component parts of suit, jumper and coat can be found in the wardrobes of most professional men. A mix of concept and commerce drives Calvin Klein menswear.
The brand is emphasising digital growth this year. Invitations for this show had #calvinkleinlive printed on them, inviting the front row to use the hashtag when posting on Instagram. This follows last year’s successful #mycalvins campaign around the relaunched branded underwear. Users of Instagram, including celebrities Kendall Jenner, Miranda Kerr and Daisy Lowe, posted selfies of themselves wearing the underwear, with the hashtag eventually generating 11m likes, shares and comments across 25 countries. The new advertising campaign for Calvin Klein Jeans, featuring model Lara Stone and singer Justin Bieber, continues the brand message, with #mycalvins in the top right hand corner.
E-commerce is next. Sites exist across Europe and America and a Chinese version, calvinklein.cn, launches in March. This is projected to bring double-digit growth to the brand in the region by 2020.
Milan’s menswear shows have seen a trend for real life winter-ready layering. Bottega Veneta’s collection on Sunday morning fitted this theme – linen macs, soft-cotton hooded tops, corduroy tracksuit pants and silk skinny scarfs were included. The Salvatore Ferragamo show layered longer, chunky knitwear under boxy bikers, and some models wore two jackets and oversized scarves. This followed Versace’s show on Saturday, a somewhat sober mix of knitwear, suiting and outerwear in a neutral palette. The brand’s trademark flamboyance wasn’t overhauled completely, though – there were full-length fur coats, Mongolian lamb-work bags and knitted joggers in four-ply cashmere.
Trends need not be fickle engines of pure consumerism. We have them in ethical living, too you know. 2015 is all about self-reliance. More dynamic than the downshifting trend (work fewer hours, move to the countryside, keep bees), self-reliance is about actively claiming ownership of our lives and wresting supply chains from global corporations. So from food to finance, watch out for local organisations which offer alternative ways of doing things and systems that are not reliant on the whims of big business or local government.
In 2015 there are no extra points for recycling, saving energy or using the bus, not the car – these are settled behaviours that you should be doing automatically. The kitchen and garden (or community garden or allotment), where we carry out transformative processes like composting, are at the heart of self-reliance. Take your lead from foodie trends that aim to localise parts of the food chain, wrestling them back from food corporations and their impactful supply chains.
One way to do this is by processing your own food. Get acquainted with archaic-sounding kitchen verbs: brewing, fermenting, brazing, curing. For the philosophy, see Michael Pollan’s Cooked: a Natural History of Transformation. For the practical, check out the abundance of courses out there: livingfood.co.uk offers fermentation and oosha.co.uk offers raw chocolate-making, or seek out kits and accessories like fermentation pots (peppermintheath.co.uk).
Growing your own food remains fundamental to ethical living, but things are getting aspirational here. Self-confessed “plant geek” James Wong’s Homegrown Revolution will have you growing saffron and goji berries on a UK allotment. Also try the UK’s biggest seed-swapping event, Seedy Sunday, in Brighton on 1 February. Presenter Kate Humble has a brilliant range of courses on everything from lambing (March/April) to growing your own wedding flowers (May) on her working farm in Wales (humblebynature.com).
Greening your money gives you a buffer from the vagaries and injustices of the global financial structure. Good Money Week is in October, but the principles last all year around (goodmoneyweek.com).
Over the last decade I’ve watched – and occasionally tried to intervene – as clothes lovers become captive customers. Super-cheap fast fashion means disposability. Don’t buy for landfill. Fight back. DIY fashion needn’t mean knitting worthy jumpers, as Secrets of Sewing Lingerie (Kyle Books, £15.99) makes clear. The bourgeoning craft handmade movement is important for local economic relationships and capitalises on the ethical benefits of shorter supply chains.
So in 2015 avoid a monocultural existence where you devolve responsibility to a few corporate brands for your food, entertainment and technology. Instead look for the biodiversity of local organisations and alternative ways of living.
There is no such thing as rubbish, just a paucity of imagination. That’s how businesswoman Donna Fenn from Harrogate sees it. She set up Remadeinbritain.com as a hub for the growing upcycling community to unite customers with makers who add value to discarded materials through design and ingenuity. So far there are 300 retailers selling furniture, interiors, lighting, clothing, jewellery and accessories, including products by this column’s favourite neo-Womble, designer Max McMurdo. Fenn is partly driven by opportunity (280m tonnes of waste are produced here each year, so imagine the repurposing possibilities) and a bit of shame – based on recycling figures, the UK is only just inside the top 10 countries in Europe, and way behind Austria and Germany (remadeinbritain.com)
The film-going audience is well used to apocalyptic scenarios. But in this sub-genre, climate change gets central billing as sci-fi films (and books) move on. The latest cli-fi flick out there is Interstellar
If you have an ethical dilemma, email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk
Wearable tech should be sexy. What could be more thrilling than a skirt that twinkles with LEDs on the dancefloor, or a dress that transforms from midi to maxi at the touch of a button? How about a jacket with built-in wifi? Indeed, what could excite the fashion industry, driven by thirst for the new, any more?
Yet, when the topic is raised in fashion circles, eyes glaze over and yawns are stifled. The problem is not a lack of enthusiasm for tech, given that most editors, buyers and designers are iPhone virtuosos, spending the year running around fashion shows, glued to Instagram. What is not adding up is what wearable tech is and what it can do.
Hussein Chalayan was making spookily futuristic automated catwalk dresses as long ago as 2006; Richard Nicoll showed a breathtaking light up dress at London fashion week in September. But nothing that thrilling seems anywhere near point of sale. We have been hearing about T-shirts that monitor heart rate and muscle density, which make sense for sports fans but are not as compelling as beautifully-cut trousers for those who are into fashion.
Tory Burch has produced branded fitness tracker bands, but to the lay consumer the distinction between these and similar iPhone apps is not obvious. Opening Ceremony has launched varsity jackets with integrated phone chargers, but the advantage over putting a charging case on your phone seems negligible. So far, wearable tech seems to be a way for early adopters to experiment and be seen at the vanguard of innovation, rather than creating burning consumer desire. None of the big British fashion retailers are putting wearable tech at the centre of their buying strategies for spring/summer 2015.
The Apple Watch has piqued fashion’s interest, however, with the company wooing Anna Wintour and Karl Lagerfeld at Paris fashion week and the Watch appearing on the cover of Chinese Vogue. But whether the Watch is an outlier – and whether it is a true wearable or a smartphone that happens to be strapped on to one’s wrist – is debatable. Similarly, two small but intriguing product launches for 2015 – US designer Rebecca Minkoff’s bracelets that charge iPhones, on sale in February, and Ringly’s vibrating rings, which activate when your phone rings and launch in January, seem more like chic gadgets than true fashion.
Getting people “obsessed” – as the fashion industry would say – will require products with a useful, clear purpose that are aesthetically on point. There has been talk about whether women will wear bulky, masculine devices, and many of the resulting ideas – feminine, pastel-coloured trinkets – are at odds with trends towards functional wear and minimalism. The involvement of the industry’s most influential designers – the likes of Chanel, JW Anderson, Céline, Stella McCartney, Prada, and on the high street Topshop, Cos, Zara – would address this.
In January 2014, Lagerfeld sent Chanel’s couture models down the catwalk wearing trainers, bestowing fashion’s official blessing on flat shoes, and a million tills started ringing. Wearable tech needs such a watershed moment. You can bet design houses are quietly meeting experts, eager to ensure they are not left behind, but cautious about rushing out a product that flops.
In Britain, Burberry may well make the first move. The company is famed for technological innovation and has a dedicated “what if?” division exploring such areas. Still, 2015 feels a bit early for that turning point – unless someone in the industry has a closely guarded secret up their sleeve. In any case, with the Apple Watch a sure topic of conversation at the next round of fashion weeks in February, this will be the year fashion’s enthusiasm for wearable tech truly flourishes.
“Is that an Apple Watch?” is a phrase likely to ring out in the spring of 2015 when the result of the company’s highly anticipated foray into wearable technology finally hits the shelves.
For Apple, the Watch is the first completely new product since the iPad and Steve Jobs’s death in 2011. Its initial success is guaranteed.
“Even if it only told the time, Apple is likely to sell millions of them with the first launch,” said Ben Wood, head of research at analysts CCS Insight. “Apple makes beautiful things and the Watch is beautifully engineered. Combined with its brand credentials it’s going to be a fashion statement and a status symbol with a much broader appeal than current smartwatches.”
But for market watchers it’s not what the Watch can do for Apple but what Apple can do for everyone else.
Wearable tech is not all about what springs from Apple’s headquarters in Cupertino, California. This year, Google joined Pebble, the pioneer of the modern smartwatch, with a plethora of Android wear. Google watches from LG, Sony and Motorola landed on users’ wrists from June – some attractive, others less so – while Samsung released not one but five smartwatches in 2014.
Makers of fitness trackers and smartclothing are vying to prove there’s life beyond smartwatches: more than 70m fitness wearables sold globally this year, seven times the number of smartwatches, according to Gartner research.
“I’m expecting smart wristbands like the Jawbone Up to do well this Christmas, as the capabilities and costs have come down to a level where they make good gifts,” said Angela McIntyre, a research director at Gartner.
Come January, all eyes will be on Las Vegas for the world’s largest technology trade show – International CES – where manufacturers from across the globe will be pushing their latest wearable gadgets hoping that something will catch punters’ eyes.
Crowdfunding platforms may also deliver some interesting wearables next year. According to George Jijiashvili, wearables analyst for CCS Insight, anything from a device to make a normal watch “smart” to wireless earbuds that track heart rate, activity and play music, all without a smartphone, are pitching for funding.
Technology researcher Gartner expects another 68m wearable fitness devices to be sold worldwide in 2015 as lower price gadgets make them more accessible. The Misfit Flash and Jawbone Up Move, for example, cost less than £50.
But it is advanced heart rate monitoring devices such as Intel’s Basis Peak and the Jawbone Up3, the follow-up to the successful Up wristband, that will power greater insight into fitness and sleep for many.
“Heart rate monitoring is likely to be the big thing in 2015 for most people looking at wearable technology,” said McIntyre. “It’s been around for the past couple of years, but it’s getting better, more affordable and has that cool factor, particularly around wristbands and watches.”
The Up3 has electrical skin sensors that promise to monitor health through heart rate, not while a user exercises but in the moments before and after falling asleep or waking up.
“That’s the only time when stress, caffeine and everything else can’t affect your beats for a true picture of how healthy you are,” said Jason Donahue, of Jawbone.
Chip maker Intel is also making moves in wearable technology. The Basis Peak fitness watch promises 24-hour heart-rate tracking using an optical sensor that shines a light into the skin. The Peak can monitor the crucial stages of sleep and the quality of a night’s kip using heart rate, rather than just quantity, as most others do.
Smartwatches will be in on the health and fitness tracking game in 2015 too. Most Google smartwatches have heart rate monitors and the Apple Watch will have one too.
Collecting all that data is useless if users can’t do anything with it, though. Google, Microsoft and Apple announced free health-tracking services this year, each aiming to help users understand their health data.
It promises to be the year where the number of steps you take and hours of sleep you get will generate meaningful suggestions, either for the user or their doctor.
Wearable technology will not be limited to obvious gadgets, and 2015 is predicted to be the year when smartclothing finally becomes a reality beyond light-up Christmas jumpers. Once the domain of elite athletes, smartclothing is slowly filtering down the high street.
Clothing brands such as Adidas, Under Armour and Ralph Lauren, which showed off its new smartshirt at the US Open tennis tournament, are starting to make sports tops with built-in heart-rate and respiration monitoring.
“Smartshirts can measure things like heart rate and respiration much more accurately and without having to wear another device, because they can embed more sensors across a larger area,” said McIntyre.
More than 10m smart garments are expected to be sold in 2015, displacing conventional chest straps and other sports enthusiast gear. Smartsocks, motion tracking underwear and light reactive jackets that glow the harder you train are in the pipeline.
Fitness is just one area being explored by smartclothing, with manufacturers envisaging GPS shoes, colour changing ties and smartphone charging jackets. Even beachwear could go smart with bracelets that track your desired tan level and swimwear that changes colour when you have had enough sun.
The sad and sorry tale of normcore, 2014’s most forced of forced memes, actually begins in the summer of 2010 in downtown Manhattan, where five friends who had just graduated with arts degrees were making ends meet by working for marketing agencies.
In the course of that work, each of them had to sit through cultural trend forecasts, PDF or PowerPoint presentations juxtaposing cliched stock photography with Nathan Barley-ish neologisms predicting the future. Between their inward groans and suppressed giggles, the friends recognised something of great value, a familiar form no other artist had yet nicked. Meeting at their apartments after work, they took the idea and created an art project that took the form of a trend-prediction agency called K-Hole that used the forecast medium to present serious ideas.
They began publishing their own downloadable PDFs; gradually, galleries invited them to exhibit. In October 2013, for a group exhibition at London’s Serpentine Gallery, they published a report called Youth Mode: A Report on Freedom, one chapter of which was entitled “Normcore”.
The report lay dormant for five months. However, unbeknown to the group, one of their flatmates had mentioned the term to a journalist friend. In February, Fiona Duncan wrote a piece for New York magazine claiming the term had been coined to signify a hipster trend for dressing “like tourists”, in white socks and trainers, stonewashed jeans and polo necks.
The story immediately set off a hilarious scrap among some young American journalists, with one, Christopher Glazek, publicly accusing Duncan of mistaking normcore (actually meant to be about people adopting identities to fit in with social groups) for “ActingBasic”, another idea in the report, to do with wearing non-designer-label clothes. Duncan apologised and blamed the New York editors: “I’ve felt an extraordinary amount of pain over this for the last few days,” she wrote on Facebook, four days after the piece was published. “My face broke out in eczema from the stress/frustration, seriously.”
The esoteric nature of the debate was soon lost when the international fashion pack, then travelling together on the autumn/winter show circuit, caught wind of the story during London fashion week. Plagued by editors hungry for trends and street-style stories, however, fashion journalists and bloggers quick off the mark applied it to a nascent trend among some stylists and designers for unostentatious, pared-back style – and a misappropriation was born.
Gap’s social media had already borrowed the term on 27 February (“We’ve been carrying your #normcore staples since 1969”, went one tweet). By 10 March, Vogue.com was asking: “What comes after normcore?””, before reviving it on 21 March, and then proclaiming Kate Middleton the “Duchess of normcore” in April.
Of course, no one, not even fashion journalists, ever seriously referred to themselves as “normcore”; at best, it was an ironic way of saying you weren’t getting dressed up. It soon became a term that could mean whatever you wanted it to, from “anti-fashion” to “wilfully anonymous”, but that didn’t stop journalists, academics and businesses from picking it up: as interest peaked in May and June, the beleaguered people at K-Hole were fielding up to 50 inquiries a week.
“We didn’t know whether to explain that what they were talking about wasn’t actually what we meant, or whether to just go with it,” explains Greg Fong, one of the five co-founders. “The brands were very interested in how we went viral, but we hadn’t actually sought that. It was a strange experience – I started to feel guilty about all the negative connotations it took on.”
Since the summer, the word has featured in a piece in the Lancet (the Lancet! The peer-reviewed Lancet!), been named by the Oxford University Press as a runner up to “vaping” for neologism of the year and come full-circle by being used as thinly concealed inspiration for Gap’s autumn “Dress Normal” ad campaign. K-Hole has been retained to consult at several tech and fashion companies.
Are there any lessons for them to learn? “Well,” says Fong, “I think it turned into a word people could use to discuss some social issues to do with our normative society and its discontents. But the other thing this all taught me is that the media is incredibly thirsty. For anything.”
Last week, I went to Tokyo for a Christian Dior show. Yeah, I know, that’s what everyone asks: Dior in ... Tokyo? Not Paris? Huh? And then they shake their heads in a fashion-people-are-crazy kind of a way.
No. There is method in this madness, and shrewdness in this extravagance. Dior’s Tokyo pre-fall event represents an emerging strategy by the great Parisian fashion houses to retain status by detaching themselves from the decline of France, and reposition themselves as global brands. The phenomenon of the catwalk show on tour – just a week earlier, Chanel staged one in Salzburg, Austria, and has previously shown in Dubai – is a ploy by which the aristocracy of the fashion industry, who for generations ruled the seas of style unchallenged, intend to maintain their supremacy in a globalised economy.
The most striking part of the Tokyo show was that the Dior collection was not Japanese in any obvious way. There were no wide sleeves or obi belts to be seen. Instead, it was steeped in the essence of Tokyo as a modern, even futuristic, city; one that has produced some of fashion’s greatest innovators. “Beneath the surface softness, Christian Dior’s work was very architectural,” Raf Simons, Dior’s creative director, told me the day before the show. “There is a strong connection there with Yohji Yamamoto, Rei Kawakubo, Issey Miyake. When I examine pieces in the Dior archives, it is astonishing how architectural the construction is, for such a feminine look.” Sequinned silver turtleneck sweaters were worn under sleeveless wool dresses with sculpted hips, a supremely glamorous version of the tight “base layer” as a strategy for cosy but sleek cold-weather urban dressing, a look hugely popular in Japan. (Uniqlo, temple of heat-tech turtleneck sweaters, has a 10-storey flagship in Tokyo’s Ginza district.) Coats had an anorak-shine that was weatherproof and flashy; wide-legged trousers were worn with cosy Fair Isle knits.
The show was held in Kokugikan, the national sumo wrestling stadium. Simons chose it for the scale – it seats 10,000, so with an audience of 1,200 it felt so huge that one almost forgot the roof was there, and could imagine the snow to be real. The stadium venue reminded me of something else, though: Will and Kate meeting Jay Z and Beyoncé at the Barclays Center in Manhattan a few days previously. This, for Dior, was almost a state visit to Japan. And – like Kate and Wills meeting the Carters – one that cast the royal visitors in a flatteringly modern, pop-cultural-savvy light. The Tokyo event follows a Dior catwalk show in Brooklyn back in May, and so far this strategy seems to be working: figures released last month showed a 13% rise in revenues for the most recent quarter, to €417m (£331m).
Social media and streetstyle have done much to democratise the traditional fashion-week circuit. A small-scale designer in London, New York, Paris or Milan who can get influencers interested can create real buzz without cash. But he or she cannot stage a multimillion-pound event in Tokyo. In this way – just as the super-rich have left the rest of the world’s population behind – the most powerful luxury houses have created a new superstratum of international glamour, with which smaller names cannot hope to compete.
Each house has its own strategy. Chanel uses its annual Métiers d’Art show to display the artistry of the haute couture ateliers – the finesse of the most accomplished embroiderers in the world, the humbling exactitude of ateliers that make only buttons, or specialise in the placement and stitching of different types of feathers. If knowledge is power, Métiers d’Art is Chanel’s opportunity to parade their golden key. For Christian Dior, on the other hand, the message is more about demonstrating relevance. This collection “isn’t about being inside a boutique, or a cocktail party, it’s about being in the world,” Simons said. “This is a dialogue. I want to be talking with everyone who is interested in the idea of Dior.”
Mention the phrase “fast fashion” and most people will think of a scratchy high street sweater with one of a predictable trio of countries listed on the inside label: Cambodia, China, or Bangladesh.
But increasingly, observant European consumers are finding a new collection of countries on the label of their fast fashion finds – countries that are a lot closer to home.
A number of factors are pushing major fast fashion chains to start expanding their production chains beyond Asia and into eastern Europe, including the benefit of being close to European retail markets and simplifying their supply chains. When a country such as Turkey, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia or Bulgaria appears on a label, the brand may also get a boost to their reputation, as consumers assume the ethics behind a skirt made in Portugal are better than those behind one made in China (though this isn’t necessarily the case).
“There are a number of factors providing an incentive to look to Europe for production, such as minimum-wage increases in Asia and political instability and commercial instability in response to major safety incidences like the collapse of Rana Plaza,” says Hannah Smith, media and outreach manager for the UK-based NGO Labour Behind the Label.
Inditex can perhaps be credited for proving the efficacy of basing fast fashion production in Europe. The company, which has brands including Zara and Pull&Bear, states that more than 50% of its clothes are produced in Spain (where it is headquartered) or surrounding nations such as Portugal and Morocco. The remainder is produced in “clusters” around the world, including Turkey, China, and Latin America.
This Europe-centric approach – the company calls this its “proximity model” – allows the chain to frequently restock its stores and respond to a fickle market at will, with store managers constantly reporting back on what’s selling and what’s not. Being able to alter what it is producing and in what quantities so quickly gives brands an advantage over chains that have to provide a longer lead time to Asian factories, and then wait for their goods to be transported.
A spokesman for Inditex said: “Inditex has always sourced a large proportion of its products in the proximity markets of Spain, Portugal and Morocco. Its brands are all about newness and the key for Inditex is speed-to-market – the proximity model means the closer to designers you are, the quicker you can get product into stores.”
The company’s primary motivation is speed-to-market, not the ethical or labour considerations of Europe versus Asia. The company is equally conscientious about the working conditions of factories in all its global production regions, the spokesperson said.
Reliable and current percentages of clothes made in Europe versus Asia are hard to pin down due to complex supply chains, but H&M’s website holds a clue. On the company’s supplier list there are still more factories listed in a single country – China – than in all the European countries combined.
While we may be just at the start of the trend of production in Europe, Elizabeth Cline, journalist and author of Overdressed: The Shockingly High Cost of Cheap Fashion, wouldn’t be surprised if it grows further, especially given retailers’ “obsession with speed”.
“You can’t really overstate how China becoming expensive is affecting companies that are trying to produce things cheaply, fast fashion being the preeminent example of that,” Cline said.
She added: “Every country is known for a different specialty, and in eastern Europe you can actually get workers to do more intricate work like beadwork or embroidery, where if you go to country like Bangladesh that’s going to be T-shirts and hoodies which are very basic.”
Lorenz Berzau, managing director of the Business Social Compliance Initiative (BSCI), a cross-sector industry group that works to improve working conditions in factories, said the challenges in Turkey are very different to those found in Cambodia. (While it doesn’t represent H&M or Zara, the BSCI is under the umbrella of the Foreign Trade Association, of which Zara is a member.)
“In Turkey we see that the level of social performance is in relation, better than many places in Asia, but the labour violations we do see there are more typically related to collective bargaining,” Berzau said. “Management systems are an issue but practically it’s more related to sub-contracting, and then the discussion starts about finding out where exactly the subcontracting is happening.”
There are other global changes in the industry too, including production in African countries such as Morocco and Ethiopia and a growing global awareness of the need for workers’ rights. Smith, from Labour Behind the Label, cites significant developments in Cambodia, where earlier this year the government agreed to increase the minimum wage. However she predicts this kind of workplace organisation will take much longer to develop in Europe.
Cline sees the industry at a self-imposed tipping point. “I think we may have reached a point where fast fashion companies have exploited all the places that they can and they are returning to places that they’ve already been,” she said. “So I’m hoping we’ve reached a point where the balance is tipping back in favour of garment workers, because there’s really not too many more places these companies can move to make their clothes.”
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Do expensive clothes come with a guarantee of ethics? If you pay more for clothing, do workers on assembly lines and in cotton fields automatically get paid more?
Cheap retailers such as Primark, Tesco and Asda are generally held up as the villains of the industry: accused of driving wages and working conditions down through their desire to sell clothes at extraordinarily cheap prices. Buying expensive clothes is often suggested as an ethical option, with the idea being that designer brands somehow use their profit margins to benefit their workforce. However, a high price tag is no guarantee of ethical practices.
Numerous high-end brands including Prada, Hugo Boss and Dolce and Gabbana have been highlighted in a recent Clean Clothes Campaign report on conditions in the “Euro-Mediterranean textile cluster” – the former Soviet countries of eastern Europe plus Turkey. The rise of this region as a fashion industry hub has been aided by its “Made in Europe” brand – a concept that purports to be a guarantee of standards above and beyond those of “Made in Asia”.
According to the report, Germany and Italy are the biggest destinations for garments from this European hub and many customers are from the luxury sector. So while workers in Moldova produce clothes for Primark and Tesco, they also sew for Versace, Dolce and Gabbana, Armani, and Max Mara.
One striking finding from the report is that the gap between legal minimum wages (the legal minimum a person can be paid) and minimum estimates for living wages (the minimum pay rate needed for a person to lead a decent life) tended to be “even larger in Europe’s cheap labour countries than in Asia”.
In Croatia for example, the report says suppliers for Benetton and Hugo Boss pay one-third of what would constitute a minimum living wage. A spokesperson from Hugo Boss states that it “obligates its suppliers to comply with the applicable minimum wage legislation” and that “wage negotiations are the exclusive domain of the supplier, its workforce and other parties within their countries, some of which are accorded roles by national legislation,” though it is “open to every form of constructive dialogue”.
It is low minimum wages that draw corporations to the global south. Burberry’s decision to close factories in Britain in 2007 and relocate manufacturing to China was driven by cost based analysis – it wanted to make £1.5m a year more in profit. Profit depends on companies maximising the difference between a garment’s sale price and its production cost. High-end retailers and the luxury sector can appear to exist outside of this system – shielded by ideas like craftsmanship and design, but behind the gloss is the same dirt. The same factories and the same working conditions.
A spokesperson from the Clean Clothes Campaign states that “none of the premium brands have responded to the report.” Hugo Boss received a pre-release copy of Stitched Up and while it has spoken with the Clean Clothes Campaign is hasn’t made a specific statement on the Stitched Up findings.
Rewinding back through the supply chain, filmmaker Leah Borromeo has documented India’s cotton fields for Dirty White Gold: “If you want a purely ethical line you also have to go beyond this idea that your clothes are made in a sweatshop, that’s not where they are made, that is where they are processed,” she explains. “You have to look at who made the thread for that fabric and who supplied the cotton for that thread. At the base of it is the farmer.” Borromeo points out that fields aren’t divided between expensive brands and cheap brands, instead the same farmers and labourers are at the behest of the market.
Nor are poverty wages by high-end brands just an overseas issue. Amy Hulme, programme manager at the Living Wage Foundation, points out that there are no retailers – either high street or high end – registered as paying the living wage to shop staff in Britain: “We hope that the retail industry will strive to do better. They employ a very large amount of people in this country and if they did implement the living wage it would lift a huge number of people out of working poverty and allow them to have some financial stability.”
Hulme believes paying a living wage has highly positive benefits: “Every argument for being a sustainable company can be applied to the living wage. You get more from happier staff who feel like you value them. Companies we have already accredited say staff turnover is lower and they save money on training.”
With high-end brands, further insult is added to the injury of low wages, as workers sew and sell items that they have no chance of ever affording. Luxury it seems has more respect for their merchandise than for people.
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Hey ho, the polar vortex is coming, and the only boots to carry you through intact it are these. Except you can’t get them until mid-spring 2015.
LL Bean duck boots, the extraordinarily warm rubber-and-leather boots which, of course, look nothing like a duck, are predicted to sell almost half a million pairs this winter. Then there’s the 100,000-long waiting list. The good (or perhaps useless) news is that they do ship from their Maine plant to the UK, but it takes a few weeks so you can expect yours to come in time for Easter 2015.
While the three year waiting list days of the Birkin have slowed down (this bag, created by Hermès for the French singer Jane Birkin in the 1980s supposedly after the company’s CEO saw her struggling with a giant bag while boarding a plane, created a frenzy of demand), waiting lists are still two-a-penny. In fact, the sure-fire way to turn anything cult is to make a limited run of it.
The sudden rush screams gimmick, but the company insists they’re not. A quick call to the hotline reveals that they are indeed “selling something crazy” and the whole thing is “unprecedented”. So what’s the fuss?
Well they’re incredibly waterproof, in a way not dissimilar to Sorel boots, just with a little heel, you know, like a duck. They’re also warm and built to last. According to Carolyn Beem, company spokesperson at LL Bean, kids are to blame. “Younger people are buying them,” she told Yahoo Style. “They’re all over college campuses and high schools ... without changing anything, they’re back in style.” 
Add that to the sudden boom in practical outerwear, their appearance last winter on The Sartorialist, the polarising rise of the lumbersexual and possibly Alexa Chung in a lumberjack jacket for Tommy Hilfiger, and practical footwear is having a moment. Johnny David, deputy editor at Esquire, thinks it’s finally gone mainstream: “The male lumberjack look might finally be on the wane – you know the game’s up when even Leonardo DiCaprio is seen sporting a ridiculous beard, though, to be fair, he is about to play a real-life frontiersman – but some of the accoutrements of that trend will be with us for a while yet.” 
The obvious solution is to make more of them, except it’s not that easy. Inundated with requests, the company issued a statement on their site: “We make our boots by hand, so sometimes we just can’t make them fast enough, but we promise that our team of stitchers in Brunswick, Maine, will start handcrafting yours as soon as possible”. What’s more they’re apparently hiring 100 workers as well as a second injection-moulding machine.
But while practical-wear seems more acceptable among women (we’ve been wearing trainers and wellies to work for years), it has taken its time with menswear. “You might scoff at the man who buys all-weather boots,” says Davis. “But as with other areas of style, men have woken up to some of the everyday practicalities women have struggled with for years. Like, how to look stylish in the British winter.
“As we know, style and comfort haven’t always made happy partners.”
Primark has shown it is not immune from the chill blowing through the retail sector after trading was hit by the unseasonably warm autumn.
The discount clothing chain, which recently toasted a ”magnificent” year with sales of nearly £5bn and a 29% rise in profits, achieved like-for-like sales below the expectations of Associated British Foods, its owner.
The weather conditions, which have also affected rivals such as Next, were blamed for the disappointing performance, although AB Foods said store expansion meant total sales were still up 10% over the past two months.
Primark’s profit estimate for the year to September was also unchanged because the company budgeted for a higher level of markdowns this year.
The chain’s rapid expansion over recent years has given it 278 stores in nine countries, including 164 shops in the UK. It is planning an increase in store space of 1m sq ft this financial year, having grown to 10m sq ft – seven times the size of its entire footprint in 2000.
Primark’s on-trend ranges have made it a winner in the sector in recent years, with analysts praising its ability to mix low prices with high fashion.
Today’s trading update came during AB Food’s annual meeting, when shareholders were told operating profits for the group were broadly in line with expectations for the first two months of the financial year.
The FTSE 100-listed conglomerate, which employs 118,000 people in 47 countries, also has operations in sugar, agriculture, grocery and ingredients. Brands include Ryvita, Ovaltine, Silver Spoon, Kingsmill and Patak’s.
Shares in AB Foods fell by 4% at one stage today.
Rae Ellingham, an analyst at Charles Stanley, said: “The announcement may serve as a reminder to investors that consistent growth at Primark is not guaranteed and we remain concerned at the high valuation being applied by investors.”
Edinburgh Woollen Mill is planning to open at least 100 new stores in the next two years after the privately owned fashion group increased profits by more than a quarter.
The group, which owns more than 1,000 stores including the Peacocks and Jane Norman chains, as well as its eponymous knitwear outlets, increased profits to £71.3m in the year to 1 March despite a near 2.7% fall in sales to £551.9m, partly because of an extra week’s trading in the previous year.
Philip Day, the Cumbria-based entrepreneur who is the company’s sole owner, did not receive an ordinary dividend from the group, but a £5.65m dividend was paid to an employee benefit trust, the beneficiaries of which are not clear from accounts filed at Companies House this week. The company declined to comment on who would benefit from the trust.
Steve Simpson, commercial director of the group, said control of costs for basic supplies, particularly cashmere, wool and cotton, as well as “relentless focus on product quality, value for money and customer experience” had helped boost profits.
“Alongside a truly multichannel model, continued investment, innovation and strong cost control, the group has once again delivered a strong sales performance and outstanding profit growth,” Simpson said. “We are particularly encouraged by the sales and profit performance of the Edinburgh Woollen Mill business, which has grown consistently to become a category leader in the over-40s customer segment.”
Sales at the chain slipped £1.2m to £168.5m after the closure of a number of poorly performing stores.The impact of a fire at one of its biggest outlets was offset by a 28% rise in online sales.
Peacocks, the budget fashion chain, increased total sales by 4% to £324.9m as sales in established stores increased while online trade more than doubled.
The company made no comment on trading at the Jane Norman chain which was put into administration this summer, about three years after Edinburgh Woollen Mill rescued it from the same fate. The brand continues to trade online and via a handful of department store concessions after closing its 24 high street outlets.
In September, Day bought some of the assets of troubled fashion chain Internacionale after it went into administration for the second time in eight months.
With his wire-rimmed glasses and plume of grey hair, Chris Moore has been a familiar sight at the end of catwalks from Paris to New York since he began photographing fashion shows in the 1960s. On Monday, the 80-year-old, whom Natalie Massenet, chair of the British Fashion Council, described as “a charming pioneer”, will have his services to fashion acknowledged with a special recognition award at the British fashion awards in London.
It is not the first time Moore, who began his career aged 18 as a photography assistant at Vogue, has been decorated by the fashion establishment. He received an honorary doctorate from the London College of Fashion in 2012, and a lifetime achievement award at Graduate Fashion Week the same year.
This British fashion award, however, is the most prestigious of the lot and is an acknowledgement from his peers of Moore’s quiet impact on the way the fashion industry functions.
Moore is far from a household name, but his images of catwalk shows have been a staple in the Guardian and other newspapers for several decades. Massenet describes him as “one of the backbones of the fashion industry”.
In 1999, Moore set up the subscription service Catwalking.com, the first company to create an online archive of fashion shows.
With 15 years of catwalk shows, and a deal with the Getty picture agency since 2008, the site has survived the era of street-style photography.
The announcement of Moore’s award has been followed by a flurry of plaudits. He has a reputation as one of the nicest people in fashion and elicits fond feelings from those at the top. Suzy Menkes, the International Vogue editor, who received the same award in 2013, has worked with Moore for 25 years. She said: “Chris has been in at the beginning of everything and everyone … I salute him.”
London designer JW Anderson said Moore was “a fashion encyclopedia” and “the only person that I would let take my picture on the Champs Elysées.”
Moore responded to the award with typical understated humour. “I’m surprised and moved – if not quite to tears,” Moore told the Guardian. “After all this time, it proves everything comes to those who wait.
Moore started taking catwalk pictures in 1967, when shows in Paris were more like salon presentations, static and calm. He describes the 70s as the era when the fashion shows evolved into the familiar format of today. The 80s and 90s – the decades of high-glamour fashion and the birth of the supermodel – were the “heyday, when brands like Montana were the hot number”.
The advent of digital photography has changed things, again, Moore says. Now, Catwalking.com competes with social media sites such as Twitter and Instagram, where images of a show are often posted by editors on the front row almost instantly. Catwalking has Moore’s photographs – of a much superior quality – on the site within two hours.
Now in his ninth decade, travelling twice-yearly to shows on a schedule that frequently includes 13-hour days, Moore is the first to admit he can’t go on for ever: “I am 80 after all.” But, he says, “It’s hard to imagine not doing it. Fashion gets in your blood. It’s quite peculiar.”
Another day, another member of the Kardashian family pops up in an arty shoot on the cover of a high-fashion magazine and tries to break the internet.
Today, it’s Kendall Jenner – the second-youngest of the clan, and a big fish in fashion at the moment – who appears on three covers for Dazed Magazine’s winter issue. On the first, she clutches a teddy bear and wears Junya Watanabe. On the second, she is sombre in a Marc Jacobs military coat. On the third – pictured above – the two images are spliced together by Doug Abraham, an artist who creates surreal collages based on fashion imagery on his Instagram feed, bessnyc4.
Though Jenner is fast becoming a fashion fixture, having walked for Chanel, Gucci, Givenchy, Balmain and Marc Jacobs, celebrities with lesser style credentials are fodder for the high-fashion mags too. America’s BFF Taylor Swift, for one, put aside her usual cheerful polka-dot dresses and cherry-coloured lipstick to appear in Wonderland earlier this month, looking contemplative and very high fashion with wet-look hair, a deep tan and power brows.
Kim Kardashian’s Paper magazine cover unleashed internet havoc just a few days after Swift. Shot by Jean Paul-Goude – a photographer with iconic status, thanks to his work with Grace Jones – there was just enough of a whiff of high culture (along with the inevitable interest generated by the sight of bare bottom) to inspire a glut of think pieces in newspapers worldwide, and enough spoofs and memes to keep Buzzfeed supplied all week.
As anyone who had a subscription to The Face in the 1990s will know, mainstream celebrities appearing on niche style magazines is nothing new. Katie Grand made this kind of high-low culture moment her trademark at Pop magazine, shooting Victoria Beckham – pre-high fashion takeover - Sienna Miller and many others. At Love magazine the cast of Downton Abbey got the fashion treatment, looking very Miss Havisham-by-way-of-Vivienne Westwood in 2012.
Clearly, this kind of thing is a win for both parties: celebrities get access to the best designers, stylists and photographers (who are often highly particular about the magazines and “talent” they will work with), and their personal brands get sprinkled with high-fashion credibility. The magazines get mainstream attention they could otherwise only dream of. In the past, some celebrities might be put off by the fact that these magazines have such a small reach, being sold in specialist newsagents and read by just a few thousand people in very specific, if influential, circles. In the social media age, that doesn’t matter.
As a star with a huge social media following (16.2 million Instagram followers), Dazed editor Isabella Burley sees Jenner as one of a crop of characters who are – according to this issue’s cover line – “changing the face of fashion”.
“What’s so interesting with Kendall,” says Burley, “is that everyone’s seen her grow up on reality TV and has seen every aspect of her life through Instagram, but at the same time she has been embraced by fashion world. At the shows, some people don’t even notice it’s her. And yet many of her followers on social media would not necessarily know what goes on at a Chanel show. She is letting a whole generation see the workings of the fashion industry, which is really exciting.”
In the web-first era, these collaborations are keeping the most rarefied and luxurious of print magazines relevant, too. “I can’t wait to launch this cover and see it blow up on social media,” says Burley. “[Jenner] has fans who will never have seen her in such a conceptual fashion led way - they will go mad for it!”
What is your earliest fashion memory?
When I was at school – maybe buying my first cashmere Jaeger sweater. And my first Pucci dress.
If you had to describe yourself in just a few words, what would they be?
I probably would have to say strong, curious and loving life. I love life so much. I’m an adventuress. I love to bite into life like an apple.
You’ve said in the past you love ageing because it gives you experience...
No, no, wait a minute! I don’t love ageing but, you know, the alternative to ageing – you don’t want that. Ageing means living, right? And if you live and you’re aged, it means you have a past and if you’re OK with your past and have lived it fully, then it’s OK. As I’m talking to you, I’m doing my make-up and I can’t possibly say I love ageing or that I love my face, but this is my face. You have to make the most of it.
Do you miss being young?
I don’t miss anything about being young. What does it mean, “being young”? I am the way I am. The thing that makes me happy is I didn’t waste my time in my youth. The biggest advice I can give anyone is that the most important relationship you have is with yourself and then any other relationship is a plus, not a minus. Get to know yourself. And don’t waste your time! Be hard on yourself. You have to be non-delusional in order to like yourself but if you are straight to yourself, you will also be nice to yourself.
So you’ve never had plastic surgery?
[Sighs] No. The thing I’m afraid of is that I wouldn’t recognise myself [if I had surgery] and then I would become insecure.
You’ve just written a memoir, The Woman I Wanted to Be. So are you now the woman you wanted to be?
You know, the truth is, I became the woman I wanted to be very, very early in my life, I think in my late 20s. The wonderful thing is that I became that woman through designing the [wrap] dress and through its success. I was becoming this woman because of fashion, because of my little dress, and as I was getting more confidence, I was also sharing my confidence with other women through the dress. From the very, very beginning, it was this incredible dialogue with other women... an extraordinary adventure.
The wrap dress is 40 years old this year and it’s still your most famous creation ...
This little dress I took for granted, even though it had paid for everything I had – the houses, my children’s education, everything! I never sat down and realised the impact of it. For a while, I lost the personality of my brand and a little bit of confidence. It was only last year I decided I would celebrate this brand through the exhibition [The Journey of a Dress, which opened in LA in January]. I didn’t want to call myself a designer for so long and all of a sudden, I realised, I did more than a fashion statement with this dress. I did a sociological statement. The truth is, this book is so meaningful for me because I’ve never gone to therapy and this book was like therapy.
You write movingly about your mother, Liliane, a Holocaust survivor who was interned in Auschwitz because of her work for the Belgian resistance. You say that she taught you not to feel frightened. Do you ever feel fear?
No. I was never allowed to be afraid. She would never let me be afraid. It was part of the biggest gift she gave me. She would say: “Why are you afraid? That just makes it worse.” Fear is not an option. It just isn’t. You’ve got to deal with whatever.
Was she proud of you?
Oh yes. She only died 14 years ago, so she saw me as a full woman and she saw my children as parents. Yeah, she was proud of me but she would tell other people more than she would tell me. One of the great things about this book is that I think I honour her. Two days ago, I received an email from a 90-year-old who was also a survivor of the camps – a beautiful, strong, positive woman – and she emailed me because she’d read the book and she said: “I want you to know you not only honoured your mother, you honoured all us survivors.”
You confess in your book to an “infatuation” with a girl and also mention that people said your husband, TV and film mogul Barry Diller, had never been with a woman before your relationship. Do you think human sexuality is more fluid than we sometimes admit?
I think a lot of women have had infatuations with women. I don’t like categories. I don’t know how to answer that question. I certainly love men [laughs]. I certainly have had a lot of men. I am happy that I didn’t hold back and yet I never lost myself. I had a lot of fun, but at the base, I was a serious person.
Your friend Andy Warhol photographed you. What was he like?
He was a voyeur. He never spoke much. He would take your picture and say: “Oh great, that’s great.” He certainly was a visionary in terms of where the world was going, in terms of branding, icons... He would have lost his mind on social media.
Are you on social media?
Yes, I always joke that I’m happy I’m old enough to have been to Studio 54 and young enough to be part of the digital revolution. I love it. You have all this access and so much power! I do everything on my iPad – Scrabble, jigsaw puzzles...
I read somewhere you had a hand in the actress Anne Hathaway’s conception...
Yes! I was hosting this dinner and Anne Hathaway introduced me to her mother and her mother said: “I’m going to tell you something even she doesn’t know. I seduced her father wearing a wrap dress. In fact, she may have been conceived in one.” The funny thing was that Anne Hathaway then said: “Is that the one with the tulip print?” Her mother had kept it!
Do you have a favourite DVF wrap dress you wear all the time?
I don’t have the waist to wear a wrap dress any more.
The Woman I Wanted to Be is published by Simon & Schuster, £20. To order for £17 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846
Over 18 months ago the collapse of the Rana Plaza garment factory in Bangladesh took the lives of more than 1,100 people. In July this year, two Swansea shoppers presented messages sewn onto labels in their Primark purchases that read “Forced to work exhausting hours” and “Degrading sweatshop conditions”.
In September during London Fashion Week, anti-poverty charity War on Want dropped a 30 metre wide banner reading “Don’t mention the garment workers” over London’s Waterloo Bridge. And, just a few weeks ago, the Mail On Sunday exposed the working and living conditions of the Mauritian women making £45 T-shirts for Whistles.
While Primark conducted an investigation that suggested the labels were a hoax, all four events have managed to put the fashion supply chain in the spotlight.
Phil Bloomer, executive director at the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre squares the cause of low wages with three causes: companies pushing risk down to the weakest in the supply chain in the pursuit of short term profit; an absence of freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining for workers; and the failure of the state to protect human rights.
We asked experts from business, trade unions and campaign groups what needs to happen to ensure that those making the clothes that wind up in wardrobes in the west are paid enough to afford decent food, housing and healthcare. Opinions varied, with some experts putting more emphasis on the responsibility of brands than on government and vice versa, but all were bound in agreement that achieving a fair wage demands a co-ordinated approach from players across the global apparel industry.
Experts will join us in the comments section on Wednesday 26 November from 1.30pm GMT to take your questions on points including:
Daniel Vaughan-Whitehead, senior economist at the International Labour Office and founder of the Fair Wage Network
Gustav Lovén, social sustainability manager at the H&M Group. Prior to joining the sustainability department Gustav worked in H&M’s supply chain organisation in east Asia based in Shanghai 
Sabita Banerji, Knowledge and Learning Advisor, Ethical Trading Initiative. Sabita leads ETI’s work on cross-cutting issues including living wages, working hours and gender.
The live chat is completely text based and will take place on this page in the comments section below, kicking off on Wednesday 26 November, from 1.30pm GMT. You can submit any questions in advance by tweeting them to @GuardianSustBiz using #askGSB or using the form below and we’ll put them to the panel on the day.
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Last week the world remembered those who died in the world wars of the last century. In 1919, as men put down their weapons and went back to work or unemployment across Europe, the ILO wrote “Peace and harmony in the world require a living wage”.
A century on and labour markets have transformed through technological advances and the forces of globalisation. None more so than the apparel industry which recently held a workshop in London on the living wage organised by Labour Behind the Label.
Still, the struggle to achieve a living wage continues, from mass worker protests in south-east Asia to activists attending Tesco shareholder meetings in the UK.
The living wage is so central to human rights in business precisely because it is a tool of immense power to achieving so many human rights. Firstly, a living wage ends immiseration – with all the loss of dignity and freedom that accompanies it. It allows wage-earners to put three nutritious meals on the table each day for their families, get kids to school, and receive basic health care when they or their family fall sick. A living wage also allows workers to participate in the social and cultural life of their society.
Currently there is an exciting surge of action around the living wage in the garment industry. It’s a result of many factors including factory fires and collapses, and labour unrest from Bangladesh to Cambodia. On the company side, it is partly attributable to the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, adopted with support from business in 2011. 
The Guiding Principles state that businesses now have an explicit responsibility to respect human rights throughout their supply chain and should “seek to prevent or mitigate adverse human rights impacts that are directly linked to their operations, products or services by their business relationships, even if they have not contributed to those impacts”. This perfectly captures the responsibility of clothing brands after the Rana Plaza factory collapse that took the lives of 1,129 workers in 2013.
The Guiding Principles demand due diligence in supply chains to prevent abuse of rights. Here, H&M’s living wage commitments demonstrate it sees this as part of due diligence while Adidas’s latest complaint mechanism is also a positive step towards offering effective remedy when abuses occur.
The causes of insecure jobs and low wages are often described as too multiple and complex – an excuse to leave them in the ‘too-difficult-box’. But there are three core drivers.
The unfair share of risk and value in the supply chain, is one. When companies seek to maximise short term profit alone, risks get pushed down and value gets pulled out from the weakest in supply chains – women workers and their families.
It’s also the absence of freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining. If workers are atomised they can play no role in the achievement of a living wage. Of course factory owners will complain, and unions, like the rest of us, are not perfect. But suppliers get the unions they deserve and if you treat worker organisations with distrust and disdain, you’ll get the same back. The July 2014 global framework agreement between IndustriALL and Inditex shows what can be done.
The third driver is states not fulfilling their duty to protect human rights. Too often the minimum wage is set at levels that represent the interests of national elites – too many legislators in Bangladesh and Cambodia are factory owners.
These are not healthy features of a 21st century garment industry. Fortunately some influential clothing brands are beginning to model systemic innovations in their supply chain, often amidst a jungle of obstacles in their own companies (from buyers’ incentives, to the absurd exigencies of ‘fast fashion’).
The statement by leading fashion retailers in Cambodia, in the face of government intransigence, that they are “ready to factor in higher wages and want more co-operation with trade unions” is common sense yet ground-breaking. And Labour Behind the Label and Clean Clothes Campaign report that several companies have recently adopted credible living wage benchmarks.
These efforts are valuable innovations. But we now need transformational steps to achieve a living wage in the garment sector. At the London workshop, a number of brand-representatives stressed key factors for success in achieving the living wage.
Businesses need leadership to model robust precedents that embed the living wage in company practice, and advocate loudly about the need for governments and the sector to act together.
Cross-sector co-operation between the most influential companies, unions and governments is vital to develop a new wave of mutual obligations across the garment sector. This can institutionalise credible benchmarks for the living wage, enforce supply chain transparency, and embed sector-wide collective bargaining agreements with trade unions and governments.
And a gender perspective is also key. The vast majority of workers producing our clothes are women, and the living wage must embrace the basic needs of these women and their families.
With this systemic and sector-wide approach, the apparel industry would reassess the share of risk and value in their supply chain. It would substantially bolster its social license to operate in the 21st century by building trust with customers and the wider public.
Brand representatives have privately admitted that higher wages deliver higher productivity and lower other costs such as absenteeism and employee turnover. Apparel companies’ long term sustainability, including their profitability, depends on stable politics, rule of law, an increasingly engaged and motivated workforce, and adequate regulation to prevent leading companies being undercut by short-termist, cowboy-competitors. This future has the UN Guiding Principles’ call for companies to respect human rights, and government to protect human rights, at its heart.
Phil Bloomer is executive director at the Business and Human Rights Resource Centre. He tweets at @pbloomer
Read more stories like this:
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘brought to you by’. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
We met in a greasy spoon in New York in 1989. We were over there doing textile and fashion internships and a friend introduced us. I was feeling slightly alone and Wak was, too, so for three months we hung out, drank margaritas and went to gallery openings without having a romantic relationship. We returned to the UK to finish our degrees – Wak to London and me to Brighton. The next time I saw her was a year later, when I went to use the toilets at a pub off Charing Cross Road. Wak happened to be in the pub and recognised my bag outside the loos. She grabbed me as I ran out, and that was it. She got me drunk, and our relationship started. I was quite shocked by how many pints a small, young Japanese girl could drink.
I didn’t think I’d ever get married, but when Wak’s student visa was finishing, we wanted to stay together. Our company, Eley Kishimoto, was born on 2 May 1992 – the day we got married. We put the wedding money into print tables, went to Turkey on honeymoon and bought pots and pans to make our steamer. We were quite young when we had our two children – for the first I was 24 – but things didn’t change. Our first child came to Paris with us when we met Marc Jacobs, and both children always came to meetings when we worked with McQueen. It became part of our personality: Mark and Wak with the kids.
I’m Welsh and and Wak’s Japanese, and our personalities reflect the generalisations that come with it. I’ve had to learn a Japanese work ethic. We’ve been together 24/7 for 22 years, but there’s still an energy there and we’re incredibly independent. Wak is the creative force; I look after the general direction of the studio. My dream is to create a freedom for her to do exactly what she wants without any external pressure. She is possibly the world’s best textile designer. Nobody beats her.
Having been a couple since our early 20s, we’ve grown together as adults. After I did my MA we almost immediately got married and started the business, so neither of us knows any other work environment. It’s very important to us to maintain our own space in the studio – his office is upstairs and I work downstairs.
Our house in Brixton is a two-minute walk away, and because we know what goes on in the business during the day we don’t speak much about work at home. Our evenings don’t start with: “So, darling, what did you do today?” Mark is a great father to our two kids. He’s very attentive. In some ways he is more like a mum than a dad. Ever since they were little he did more than a lot of dads do, from preparing their food to changing them, and he did the majority of dropping them off at school. That makes me sound lazy, but he enjoys it.
Mark is a very emotional person. Sometimes he comes across as strong and opinionated, but he has another side that is very soft. Within the same day that can flip quite a lot. In the end I go: “Whatever!” But he has assets I don’t have: he’s communicative and outgoing. Sometimes I envy that. I’m quite shy and inward. In terms of verbal communication he’s always a little bit fearless – it’s a shield for me from the outside world. It has created an environment where I am safe and secure.
Things get tough when both of us worry about the same thing, because then it’s not like one of us can lift the other up. Whether it’s about the kids or each other’s health, those are the times when things can feel heavy. The thing I’m most proud of that we have done together is keeping Eley Kishimoto alive. And our kids. They’re both our babies.
Eley Kishimoto has launched its first hand-screen-printed wallpaper collection, with 12 designs taken from their fashion archives – available to buy on (eleykishimoto.com)
If you’d like to appear in this column, email meandyou@observer.co.uk
Robert Whittaker traces his razor sharp knife around a paper template to cut a perfect shoulder panel for a cotton shirt.
Whittaker, 61, is one of a dying breed – skilled craftsmen who precisely measure and cut shirts for the rich, the famous and royalty.
He has been cutting shirts since 1968, leaving school at 15 to learn his trade on Jermyn Street in Mayfair, central London. He has worked at Dege & Skinner, the Savile Row tailoring house, since 1992 making shirts costing from £234-£450 each – and there is a minimum order of four.
Dege & Skinner is one of only two family-owned tailoring houses (along with Henry Poole & Co) left on Savile Row, which has been at the heart of London’s bespoke tailoring business for more than a century. Next year marks Dege & Skinner’s 150th anniversary.
This “golden mile of tailoring” has produced suits for Prince Charles, Winston Churchill, Muhammad Ali, Duke Ellington, Lord Nelson and Napoleon III.
“We are the only firm in Savile Row now doing bespoke shirt making. And I don’t think there are any left on Jermyn Street,” Whittaker mourns.
Like much of Britain’s once vibrant tailoring and textiles industries, most of these traditional skills have been lost as factories in China, Turkey and other cheap labour markets grabbed the work.
“It’s a bit of a dying art. But there’s no reason why it shouldn’t be kept going,” says Whittaker, who is passing on his knowledge and experience to apprentice Tom Bradbury, 20.
William Skinner is the third successive generation of his family to become managing director of the tailoring house and is committed to safeguarding the Savile Row traditions and keeping the business in the family.
It has three royal warrants – from the Queen, the sultan of Oman, and the king of Bahrain. About 25% of its business comes from military tailoring and it makes all the uniforms for princes William and Harry.
A browse through a rail of half made suits dotted with tailor’s chalk marks reveals a long grey coat with a poppy still in the button hole. A brown tag hangs from the lapel with the name Prince William scrawled on it. “Oh yes, that was the coat he wore on Sunday [for the remembrance service],” says Skinner casually.
He says the everyday customer is the core of the business, but these royal appointments are important “cream”.
Michael Skinner, William’s father and the company chairman, was at the Queen’s coronation in 1953 when he, his father and John Dege dressed the peers of the realm for the occasion.
But much has changed since. In the last 10 years several venerable Savile Row brands have fallen on hard times and been hoovered up by overseas investors.
Hong Kong’s Fung family, headed by billionaire patriarch William Fung, now owns four of the street’s best known names: Gieves & Hawkes; Hardy Amies, formerly the Queen’s official dressmaker; Kent & Curwen; and Kilgour.
Skinner is concerned that buyouts like these may affect quality. He is also worried about the use of the Savile Row brand for the sale of clothing that is not true bespoke.
“The fact that some firms up and down Savile Row are being bought is good to preserve the name,” he says. “But when that happens, sometimes the traditional values of tailoring can be diminished.”
Are some of these firms now making clothing in China? “I don’t know but I would guess that they are. Hardy Amies doesn’t do tailoring now and has no ladieswear [which is what it was famous for].”
Hardy Amies, which designed the dress for the Queen’s silver jubilee portrait, is now just a brand name to sell clothing to places like China, where the public have an insatiable appetite for British heritage products.
“Savile Row is world renowned for making clothes,” Skinner says. “So if someone can attach the Savile Row brand to a suit and knock it out around the world – it’s prestige, it adds a cachet.”
The Savile Row Bespoke Association was set up in 2004 to protect and promote the practices and traditions of the street. It has trademarked the name Savile Row Bespoke and takes legal action against those that infringe the brand.
“We could outsource tailoring to China, but then we wouldn’t be a Savile Row tailor,” Skinner says. “I believe in doing what we say we do.”
The Dege & Skinner boss is also concerned that the Fung takeover may encourage landlords to raise rents on the Mayfair street. “A bigger conglomerate, with deeper pockets, can afford to pay higher rents – so any rent rise would hurt them less than it hurts us,” he says.
The firm signed a 15-year lease on its base at 10 Savile Row in 2011 and has a rent review in June 2016. There is always a battle between tenants, the council and landlords about how to categorise Savile Row – is it a retail street, or not?
Skinner has no doubts: “Savile Row is not an A1 retail street (which command higher rents), like Bond Street or Regent Street. It’s a destination street. We are maintaining the rich culture and tapestry of this city.
“It could be quite easy for me to say ‘I’m fed up of paying rent here’ and move a mile away or wherever, but it wouldn’t be the same.”
Dege & Skinner is certainly preparing for the future. A tour behind the scenes at 10 Savile Row reveals a warren of rooms, stairs and corridors.
Skinner proudly points out the young people – the next generation of Savile Row tailors – who are busily measuring, stitching and cutting. Some are already fully qualified tailors and cutters; others are apprentices who are learning their craft under the tutelage of more experienced practitioners.
“That highlights our belief in the future of the bespoke tailoring business. We have invested in the future of the trade, because we are confident about the future of the trade. We have a good business model; we make money and we reinvest it in the company. We are not a museum piece by any means.”
Preserving traditional skills is one thing. The bigger problem for the artisans of Savile Row is its brash, young neighbours on Bond Street, home to London’s designer brand elite.
A suit from Dege & Skinner starts at £3,800 and could take 10 weeks to make; a buyer could be in and out of Prada or Armani within 10 minutes with a suit that cost half that.
“Some people feel very at home with that and Bond Street has been very successful,” Skinner admits. “But if you have something made for you – that’s the ultimate luxury.
“A lot of people don’t want to go into a high street shop, they want the relationship and the service that we give. As long as we can maintain that, there’s every chance of surviving.”
The sharp-suited tailor recalls learning about well-known places in London when he was at school. The teacher asked the class which trade or profession was linked with areas such as Harley Street, Fleet Street, Hatton Garden.
“When the teacher said Savile Row, my hand shot up,” he smiles. “I felt immensely proud of that and I want to maintain that. We’ll do our damnedest to keep it going.”
Ted Baker has shrugged off the warm weather that has hurt rivals such as Next to deliver a healthy rise in autumn sales. The quirky clothing brand said its growing number of overseas stores and the skill of its designers helped it overcome the unseasonal weather that has hit a number of British fashion chains.
Ray Kelvin, founder and chief executive, said: “Ted Baker is a global brand with strong international reach and this has helped mitigate the impact of any localised economic or weather issues.”
Group sales rose 15.7% for the three months to 8 November compared with the same period a year ago, as the company opened stores in Las Vegas and Toronto, and further concessions in the US, France, Spain, Portugal and South Korea. Performance was also boosted by a 34.6% rise in internet sales.
The most recent sales growth was lower than Ted Baker previously enjoyed, however. In the first half of its financial year, sales were up 17.4% and profits 24%.
Nick Bubb, an independent retail analyst, said: “Given the unhelpfully warm autumn weather, it’s very good for a UK-based clothing retailer.”
If Interstellar, Christopher’s Nolan’s thrilling, screaming, dystopian vision of one man v the apocalypse teaches us anything, it’s that crops might fail, but Matthew McConaughey’s career will never slow down.
His role as Cooper, a Nasa pilot-turned-farmer in an agrarian world, is another fine example of his McConaissance – another nail in the romcom coffin of Mr “all right, all right, all right”. But coming at it from a fashion perspective, the real star of the film is in fact McConaughey’s Carhartt Weathered Duck Detroit.
Now bear with us. It’s just a jacket. Yet the sandy-coloured, multi-pocketed number is also one of Carhartt’s most iconic, and its unbroken, hour-long appearance on Cooper, before being borrowed years later by Murphy (Jessica Chastain), his grownup daughter who wears it right until the film’s denouement, is no accident.
We know this for two reasons: one, the prominent, centre-screen branding (the tag is a whopping four metres high if you lucked out with Imax tickets); two, the state of the jacket, which becomes progressively and metaphorically more battered as the plot hurtles its wearers towards famine and death.
The film might be a commentary on climate change and family values, but given its agelessness, using Carhartt is a smart move. Identifiable by the tag (square sewn patch) and the colours (various shades of field), something that the film’s scenography elevates, you don’t need to own anything Carhartt to know what it means and why it exists. 
The company, based originally in Detroit, has been around since the 1890s; should we find ourselves hurtling towards the end of the world, chances are we’ll all still be wearing Carhartt. It’s also an interesting bit of costumery, Carhartt being a brand that transcends popular culture owing, perhaps, to its wide-reaching, generation-spanning customer base. The cut is deliberately generous, which lends itself to the more barrel-chested among us. Equally, owning this jacket was a rite of passage for teenage boys where I grew up who liked its baggier fit.
Carhartt is known for its canvas work gear, a look AdWeek associates with people who “create things with their hands instead of an app”. Craftsmen, blue-collar workers, skaters and hipsters have been wearing it since the 1890s, roughly in that order. Most recently, it’s become uniform of the lumbersexual, a rare breed of metrosexual with an aptitude for putting up shelves. Thanks to the triple-stitched seams and heavy-duty fabric, it’s quite possible some of them have been wearing the very same jacket.
With reported revenue of around $600m (£380m) in 2013, it’s one of the few brands untouched by the recession, gliding between tribes, each one reclaiming it as their uniform. Its latest incarnation, on blue-collar-hero Cooper, is a notable revival because it’s recently been derided for its hipster association. As its marketing chief, Tony Ambroza, explained: “Hipsters seem to like what we stand for and that they can’t find our clothes at mass-market retailers” – although it probably didn’t help that, in London, the company’s factory shop used to sit in the heart of hipsterville Hackney (and was ransacked by looters during the 2011 riots), and that, in the US, the company launched a craft beer with New Holland Brewing. 
But this is how Carhartt operates. Part of its shtick is its ability to jump between demographics. In a winning marketing move in the late 1980s, hip-hop label Tommy Boy Records handed out promotional jackets to key industry players. The Weathered Duck Detroit went on to appear in the video for House of Pain’s Jump Around while, according to the New York Times, the jacket became a favourite of crack dealers who wore it because “they needed to keep warm and they needed to carry a lot of stuff”. This may explain its subsequent streetwear explosion, and why, alongside Stussy and Bape, it’s still huge in Japan. Back in the US, Carhartt sponsors blue collar events, is a vocal supporter of trade unions, yet still works with fashion’s elite – last year saw collaborations with Adam Kimmel and APC.
“The thing is” explains Carhartt spokesperson Kashif Bashir, speaking about the Detroit, “this jacket will never really went out of fashion.”
When Myla Dalbesio heard she had been booked for Calvin Klein’s new underwear campaign, she cried. “It was such a surreal moment,” the 27-year-old model said of the campaign, which also features Jourdan Dunn and Lara Stone. It is by far Dalbesio’s most high-profile gig to date.
But Dalbesio’s appearance in the campaign – under the tagline Perfectly Fit – sparked a frenzy on social media. The cause? Dalbesio is, technically speaking, a plus-size model. “Genuine WTF moment,” wrote one Twitter user. “Plus-size??? I must be extra plus plus,” wrote another. Some directed their ire at Calvin Klein, despite the American brand never alluding to the model’s size, and simply placing her alongside the “straight size” models – as they’re described in the fashion industry – without comment.
“It’s kind of confusing because I’m a bigger girl,” Dalbesio told Elle about her work with Calvin Klein. “I’m not the biggest girl on the market but I’m definitely bigger than all the girls [Calvin Klein] has ever worked with, so that is really intimidating.”
“It’s not like [Calvin Klein] released this campaign and were like, ‘Whoa, look, there’s this plus-size girl in our campaign,” she continued. “They released me in this campaign with everyone else; there’s no distinction. It’s not a separate section for plus-size girls.”
At 5ft11in and a US size 10 (approximately a UK size 14), Dalbesio is indeed a plus-size model – agencies specialising in plus-size models begin at a UK size 12 for women. Dalbesio describes herself as “in between”, in terms of size. 
Plus-size as a concept has been co-opted – albeit sporadically – by the mainstream fashion industry in recent years. The fits and starts that the fashion industry has made towards diversity have included Vogue Paris ran a plus-size edition (edited by Penelope Cruz) in 2010, and models such as Crystal Renn, Kate Dillon and Robyn Lawley have all featured in either mainstream campaigns, cover shoots or catwalks. Plus-size clothing is itself a burgeoning market; sales of size 14-plus clothes exceeded $16bn in the US in 2013, according to Forbes.
But the key difference with Dalbesio’s appearance in the Calvin Klein adverts is that the only attention called to her size has come from the public. For years women and men have been asking why models who represent “normal” sizing can’t be used in high profile campaigns without it being a gimmick or a marketing ploy. In Dalbesio’s latest work, their voices have been heard.
Kiely Rowan, the company behind the colourful Orla Kiely fashion and lifestyle brand, has revealed a 16% rise in profits despite lower sales.
Operating profit at the company, whose fans include Alexa Chung, Keira Knightley and Lena Dunham, rose to £314,339 in the year to March. Sales slipped 10% to £9.1m as the company said it had moved away from discounting and focused on growing its retail and online businesses. The company, which also owns the Olive & Orange brand, has two shops in London and one in New York and sells products in thousands of other stores including John Lewis in the UK and Target in the US. Originally from Ireland, Kiely began designing hats before moving on to handbags and other accessories.
Dermott Rowan, chief executive of Kiely Rowan and the designer’s husband, said: “The business today is something really special – sustainable and profitable, with well-managed product lines. The brands have an exciting future.”
In accounts filed at Companies House, Kiely Rowan said it would continue to expand in the US, Asia and Australia and seek out new markets.
The luxury market is currently in slowdown and big brands such as Prada, Mulberry and Burberry are feeling the pinch. Slow economic growth and political instability in China, Russia and the Middle East has led to a clampdown in spending which in turn has had a catastrophic effect on luxury goods firms. Consultants Bain and Company were recently quoted as saying that this slowdown will put the brakes on the global luxury goods sector for some time, with many brands reigning in any rapid expansion plans.
But what does this mean for British firms Mulberry and Burberry? Mulberry is a company in deep trouble. It has issued numerous profit warnings in the past two years and retail sales in the UK have slumped by 12% in the six months to end of September.
Part of the reason for this was down to the loss of their creative director Emma Hill and the subsequent leadership of Bruno Gallion, who arrived from Hermes aspiring to take Mulberry down a more traditional luxury route, concentrating on top end expensive handbags, thereby putting it in direct competition with global giants such as Chanel and Louis Vuitton.
This was the start of the brand’s demise. Increasing its price point put the brand out of reach and alienated its core consumer. Inflating the product price could only serve to undermine brand value in the eyes of the consumer.
Part of the problem was that savvy consumers did not see the value in paying inflated prices for bags that would have cost them much less a few years ago. Mulberry didn’t have the brand equity to justify the increases and consumers started opting for better established luxury labels as a safer investment.
Burberry’s problems are predominantly down to factors out of their control eg political and economic instability. These are very different from Mulberry’s issues, which rest internally, with decisions on pricing, product and management strategy. In fact their retail sales were up 15% to £748m for the six months to the end of September, while wholesale sales rose 13% to £317m. Burberry has also enjoyed strong sales for its new fragrance My Burberry.
Where Burberry also wins points over Mulberry is through story-telling and opportunity for personalisation, especially across digital channels. Story-telling is crucial and should be woven into a brand’s fabric; through communications, behaviours and above all, products. Brands like Burberry have put simple but meaningful stories at the heart of their products and this benefits the brand, the sales channels and ultimately the shopper, who can enjoy telling the story that lies at the heart of their purchase.
The Burberry Bespoke collection, which allows consumers to personalise their iconic trench coat purchase and share across social media channels, gives power to the consumer.
So whilst Burberry has continued to grow and is just weathering the external factors - albeit with a reduction in growth like many global luxury brands, Mulberry sadly is a victim of its own aspirations due to a culmination of external factors and internal decisions resulting in a very tough situation for the brand.
The tide does seem to be turning for Mulberry though. Godfrey Davis is now at the helm, and the brand are seeking to reposition themselves back in the middle market. But this requires significant investment, all while they are still looking to appoint a new creative director.
The brand are also digitally a long way behind Burberry, who are seemingly on their way to realising their global ambitions. Their concept stores or “retail theatres” are laden with smart labels (RFID tags) full of information and catwalk content that not only allows consumers to personalise and purchase items in a click but inspires at the same time.
Also worth bearing in mind is that many luxury buyers are what are often called “excursionists” – people who don’t usually shop luxury but buy one or two luxury brands that they connect with and feel reflect their beliefs or identity. Luxury brands need to stand for something beyond aesthetics and provide customers with something deeper and more personal.
In order to succeed Mulberry needs to keep its core customer at its heart. It needs to appeal to its core market, the upper-middle class female, but only time will tell if this will be successful, or if it’s place in the market will be filled by another brand. By trying to change their image from a domestic luxury brand to a global one, they have failed to maintain a credible high-end image and this may be irreversible.
But all is not lost for the luxury market. Some luxury brands that are genuinely timeless, such as Hermes and Cartier, have both maintained solid growth during this slump by finding ways to make themselves relevant today. Making stories or weaving brand narratives that consumers want to be part of and believe is worth paying a premium for is key to establishing yourself as a valued brand within the luxury industry.
Robert Wilson is director of strategy and creativity at RPM
• Smart brand extension allows Virgin to keep up appearances
• Marketing to millennials: the rise of content co-creation
• In the age of megacities and hubs, is it time to rebrand ‘the North’?
To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your inbox, sign up free for Media Network membership.
All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out more here.
The British Fashion Council has announced this year’s recipients of the BFC Trust as House of Holland, Mary Katrantzou, Michael van der Ham, Osman, Richard Nicoll, Todd Lynn, Zoe Jordan and Emilia Wickstead, a favourite of the Duchess of Cambridge.
The initiative, now in its fourth year, is aimed at supporting designers financially and via a mentoring scheme. Grants totalling £215,000 will be split between these eight designers. Often seen as a yardstick for which designers will break into the mainstream, previous recipients have included household names such as Christopher Kane, Jonathan Saunders, Marios Schwab, Nicholas Kirkwood and Peter Pilotto.
Nicoll, who has received the grant before, told the BFC: “The support of the BFC Fashion Trust has been invaluable to my company and the future of our business. Not only have they provided tailored support and advice from experienced industry professionals and advisers, but they have enabled us to take our sales in-house and retain the services of a celebrity PR agency, which is already increasing the profile of the brand internationally”.
The German fashion house, best known for its minimalist designs and sombre colours, said it expected sales growth of 6-8% and profits growth of 5-7% in 2014, a downgrade on previous estimates that were in the high single digits.
The company blamed “increasing challenges posed by macroeconomic conditions and the recent substantial slowdown in industry growth in Europe” for the lower profits and earnings outlook.
“Over the last few weeks, our business has been increasingly feeling the effects of the weak performance of the sector in Europe and uncertainties in Asia,” said Claus-Dietrich Lahrs, the Hugo Boss chief executive.
Despite clouds on the horizon, the group reported a 9% growth in sales in its first quarter, mostly driven by strong demand in its core markets, such as the US and China. Sales in the Americas were up 11%, in Asia up 13%, compared with an 8% increase in revenues in Europe.
The fashion house is on a drive to open more stores, where it is expecting double-digit growth, and is spending €130m (£101m) on renovations and new outlets. It plans to open about 50 shops by the end of the year, bringing the total to well over 1,000.
Harper Beckham’s cameos on the front row punch above her pint-size stature – she has such star power that she upstages mama every time, such as last year when she wore a very on-trend combo of Chloe slipdress and topknot. While we’ll have to wait a while to see the three-year-old fulfill such latent charisma – the odds for the cover of Vogue in 2024 would be pretty good, surely – her brothers are doing a pretty good job as standins. The second-generation Beckham dynasty is, once again, front row centre in fashion this week.
Romeo is, as his dad has said, “the fashion one”. He has developed a uniform of skinny jeans and vintage T-shirts – showing an understanding of fashion insider behaviour way beyond his years – and inspired his mum’s autumn/winter 2012 collection.
He has also already got his own special relationship – with Burberry. Here he is in the latest festive campaign, wearing the brand’s classic trench, with an umbrella quite a lot larger than him. (Aww.) It’s the third time the pre-teen has brought his brand of all-singin’ all-dancin’ stage school cute to Christopher Bailey’s brand and it’s a collaboration that makes sense. Of all the boys, Romeo has the most Burberry-approved wholesomeness Britishness. Win-win.
Brooklyn, the oldest of the crew, is going for edgier territory, as you might expect for a 15-year-old. He has followed his mag cover debut on British men’s biannual Man About Town, with a triple cover of T magazine, photographed by Bruce Weber. One photo sees him lounging on a bed, like a adolescent poet (Rimbaud, eat your heart out) while another has him wearing specs, a comb in his hair and sweatshirt by uber-cool streetwear brand Hood By Air. All very high fashion. A turn on the menswear catwalk for Prada is surely only a matter of time.
That just leaves Cruz. Still only nine, the youngest of the Beckham boys seems more drawn to Daddy’s career path. He was signed for Arsenal’s under-nines team earlier this year, joining Romeo, who plays for the under-11s. Well, three out of four – not bad at all. Harper, whenever you’re ready, fashion has a berth for you
So then. Alongside “eating a sandwich” and “holding up a copy of a newspaper”, we now have to add “wearing a T-shirt” to the growing list of Ordinary Things Ed Miliband Somehow Just Can’t Do. The other week he was pictured in Elle magazine wearing the Fawcett Society’s “This Is What a Feminist Looks Like” T-shirt. Last Sunday the Mail claimed those T-shirts are stitched together in a Mauritian sweatshop by women earning 62p an hour.
A T-shirt. He can’t even wear a T-shirt without somehow condemning both himself and any surrounding witnesses to ridicule. What’s going to trip him up next? A doorknob? Next week he operates a doorknob so badly he fractures his wrist, and as the medics wheel him to the operating theatre, they accidentally knock an ageing war veteran off a waiting room chair, leaving him groaning in pain on the floor, at which point Miliband insists they stop his gurney so he can lean over and help the guy up, but he forgets about his fractured wrist, so as the 96-year-old decorated-war-hero-and-humbling-inspiration-to-us-all gingerly grabs his hand, Miliband abruptly screeches a barrage of agonised obscenities directly into his face, causing him to hit the floor again, fatally this time, in front of the world’s media, oh and also Miliband does a frightened little wee at the end, and they film that too.
It’s not even a nice T-shirt: it’s a shapeless cardboard-grey sack with a patronising slogan scrawled across the front in irritating faux-casual handwriting, probably designed by a wanker earning ten wheelbarrows full of rubies per day. That or a Mauritian child worker paid in sweetcorn kernels.
That slogan’s pretty annoying when worn by white middle-class politicians. THIS IS WHAT A FEMINIST LOOKS LIKE. Good for you. What are you wearing tomorrow? I EAT MY FIVE A DAY?
You’ve got to feel sorry for the Fawcett Society, which is trying to campaign for gender equality. It’s taken an ethical stance only to discover it may have inadvertently been standing on somebody’s back. It previously sold a slightly less designer-conscious, more utilitarian, agitprop-styled version of the T-shirt on its website without any generating any awkward questions about where the clothing was coming from. Its fatal mistake, apparently, was to enter into an awareness-raising scheme with the high-street retailer Whistles. That meant getting involved with the fashion industry, which, like vomit-scented burps, has nothing to recommend it. The fashion industry is an immense cultural and social blight that only gets a free pass because its would-be detractors are scared it’ll start criticising their haircut.
The fashion industry is the worst possible vessel for conveying an ethical message about anything. You might as well carve your slogan into the back of a baby seal and kick it down a spiral staircase made of orphan bones for all the good it’ll do you. Getting a moral lecture from the fashion industry is like Jeffrey Dahmer criticising your diet.
Shit the fashion industry. It’s an almighty sequinned turd defiling humankind’s collective pavement. Consider fashion week. Les bastards du jour sitting bored and resplendent in the front row watching an interminable parade of undernourished ghost train skeletons draped in diaphanous wisps of fabric scuttling along the catwalk, the whole thing an appalling confidence trick designed to make regular people feel inadequate in order to generate mountainous profits for a bunch of pricks in black polo necks and jewellery sipping cocktails in a penthouse. Probably.
Amplifying body-image issues, profiting from anxiety and employing virtual slaves in sweatshops are bad enough, but the fashion industry is also actively hastening the destruction of the very Earth we walk on. It insists on launching fresh collections each season, declaring yesterday’s range obsolete on a whim. If we’re going to stop burning through our scarce resources at a suicidal pace, we need less obsolescence, not more. If the fashion industry truly cared about the future of our planet, it’d issue a solitary line of unisex, one-size-fits-all smocks, then shut down for good. But it doesn’t give a toss about the planet, because the planet isn’t made out of hemlines and glitter.
It’s not just clothes they’ve ruined. The Ford Model T was famously only available in black. When profits stagnated, the motor industry looked to the world of fashion, and was thus inspired to create unnecessary cosmetic frills – like different colours – which would look cool for 10 minutes before falling out of favour, thereby driving fresh sales. Today every consumer product follows the same mad pattern of perpetual surface reinvention. The sheer waste of it all is going to kill us, and it’s all the fault of the fashion industry. Everything’s the fault of the fashion industry. Even the electricity I’ve burned through typing this needless attack on the fashion industry is the fault of the fashion industry.
Never mind “This is What a Feminist Looks Like” T-shirts, anyone who’s ever bought ANY T-shirt whatsoever – or a pair of trousers or even just an interesting handkerchief – is supporting this despicable trade and must be executed immediately, preferably on live television and in front of a marching band.
Next week: why all music should be deleted, starting with your favourite band.
Twitter is the harshest of fashion critics, so when Transport for London launched its new staff uniforms on Monday, the response was predictably cynical. “Wonderful – if they wanted to look like they were selling trainers in a sports store,” commented one. “Can we get a tube strike to force Fred Perry to redesign those new uniforms?” asked another.
Designed by Wayne Hemingway, the uniforms are certainly a departure from the over-sized, red-collared, navy blue fleeces most commonly seen in London Underground ticket halls. The most significant changes come via outerwear: a zip-up gilet, with a round, bright red collar, and the intriguingly named “fleecington” – a combination of a fleece and a Harrington jacket.
At the launch of the uniform, at Oxford Circus tube station, enthusiasm levels are high. Standing proud in a smart, over-sized navy covert coat with the London Underground roundel embossed on the pockets and tailored trousers, customer service assistant Serge Ake says he was “a bit tired” with the existing uniform, “but in this I feel proud, and protected and warm. People arrive here from New York, Tokyo, and we are the first people they meet in London. We needed a uniform that matches that ambition.”
Many staff had been complaining about their uniforms for years. Women were particularly uncomfortable, wearing scaled down versions of men’s clothes with trousers cut so awkwardly “that we’d all be rolling the waistbands down, over and over,” says engagement co-ordinator Sarah Beighton. This time, she says, the focus is on fit and comfort. “The platform’s really hot; the gallery’s really cold – they need to work in extremes,” adds Beighton.
Hemingway spent a year and a half consulting with staff during the research process, encouraging them to air their grievances about the existing kit and pipe up with ideas. It was in a staff meeting that the “Fleecington” was born: “Two blokes brought along Harrington jackets and said they were their favourite things in their wardrobes. Loads of others said that they loved fleeces. But fleeces are a bit scruffy – they don’t shout out ‘vibrant London’. So we decided to merge the two.”
This democratic feeling cuts across the new uniform, with customisable options ranging from beanies to traditional peaked caps; from crisp shirts to polos. The uniform is designed to cater to all religions, too, with Rastafarian hats, headscarves and turbans part of the eventual collection. The overall aim is visibility: “Increasingly we’re tapping credit cards to get into barriers, not buying tickets, and staff are taking a more ambassadorial role – we want people to easily see them and ask them for directions; to tell people what’s above ground too,” says Hemingway.
“Some of my colleagues are sceptical,” admits Ake. “Change isn’t easy, and there have been a few glitches with sizes, but I’d urge them to keep an open mind.” Currently on trial at six London stations – Harrow on the Hill, Greenford, Oxford Circus, Mile End, Camden Town and Perivale, as well as train depots at Acton Town and Edgware Road – the uniforms will be rolled out across the network next year. Away from the flashbulbs and cameras of the launch, what do TfL staff think? “Oh no – is that the new uniform?” deadpans one male customer service advisor, then sadly shakes his head. His female colleague is more generous: “Well, I will say that the women’s uniform is better than the men’s. But that’s all I’m saying. That and bless them. They tried.”
The Malm – Ikea’s minimalist, three-drawer chest – is a staple of the student and twenty-something interior design aesthetic. Walls might be decorated with posters of the Cocteau Twins, Gucci Mane or Ellie Goulding, but the Malm is always there, reminding us that behind our affectations lies a universal need for practical, low-cost furniture.
Fashion works in much the same way. There’s a pair of 1980s denier black opaque tights from M&S underpinning most autumn/winter looks. But according to the predictions of one expert, Fortune 500 businessman Stefan Engeseth, high-street fashion trends as a whole could be going the way of Ikea. According to Engeseth, the future of fashion could be flatpack.
Let’s take a moment to think about what this means: clothes coming in separate parts to be easily assembled at home and adjusted for the purposes of different wearers. Waistbands on trousers you can adjust if you’re in between sizes. DIY sleeve lengths. Adjustable collars. Pick-your-own buttons. Or simply hundreds of T-shirts in the colour you want.
He also explains how building your own clothes from scratch is not just a practical move – it has an emotional effect on the wearer ... customers can personalise and “hack the designs” as he explains in a press release. Imagine the sense of pride you’d get from designing and making your own clothes. 
At this stage it’s worth mentioning this is at the moment totally hypothetical. A representative from the company also assures me it has no immediate plans to launch a fashion line. But, as extreme as it sounds, surely it’s no more far-fetched than believing 3D printing to be the saviour of fashion, which many experts think it might be.
Is it a realistic move? I think there are two schools of thought. The first one places craftsmanship at its core. Of course independent retailers selling bespoke pieces made by local designers using ethically sourced materials is a preferable alternative to the “stack ’em high, sell them cheap and dispose of them six months later” philosophy. Furthermore, with sequin-and-bead embellishment exposed as being one of the biggest drivers of slave labour, the simple, no-frills approach of the Scandinavian design aesthetic would be a welcome move away from that. But would this be a viable option for most average to low-income consumers? It seems unlikely.
The second is more utilitarian. Minimal is always a popular look and the idea of creating a uniform at home is, of course, appealing. It is also easy to see why this would be the assumed progression of the much talked about “normcore” trend channelled by the Gap “Dress Normal” campaign and seen in the widespread popularity of Muji and Uniqlo.
But while it’s one thing to dress as Winston Smith on your weekends, it’s another to suggest that people will want to alter their spending habits and do away with the process of browsing, trying on and purchasing be it in-store or online. What’s more, Engeseth’s theory seems to overlook the fairly glaring fact that most people don’t have the confidence to assemble their own clothes. Presumably, flatpack clothing will be easier than anything on the Great Sewing Bee but it still requires a basic level of practical skill.
It’s easy to see why the proposed Ikea model would seem desirable alternative to disposable fashion. It’s just whether it’s a realistic one. I mean – could you be bothered to build your own T-shirt before going out for a drink? I doubt it.
When I saw Ed, Harriet and Nick in their T-shirts I immediately wondered who made them. Surely a feminist campaign would know that the millions who sew almost everything that goes into our wardrobes are part of the so-called Cut Make and Trim army – predominantly young women in the developing world who are notoriously vulnerable to exploitation.
Only 18 months ago 1,129 workers died at Rana Plaza in Bangladesh, brands said sorry and alliances were set up to bring change. So what happened here?
Although it’s been the subject of allegations in the past (2007), the manufacturer CMT seems to have a relatively good industry reputation and is feted for efficiency and a 24-hour operation offering fast turnaround orders (cynics might say that is where the dormitories come in).
Analysts describe Mauritian labour laws as relatively stringent and point to the fact that the apparel industry has moved away from cheap labour and cheap products. That trade goes to Bangladesh, Vietnam and the Philippines.
However it is clear that Mauritius is now using many more migrant workers in its 50,000 strong garment industry, many from Bangladesh. Migrant garment workers are even more vulnerable to exploitation. Still, Whistles may have thought it was picking the best of the bunch. The truth is that the pay and conditions alleged at CMT are typical of the current global textiles industry, not a shocking anomaly.
So perhaps we should ease up on the shadenfreude that accompanies Harriet Harman wearing sweated clothing at PMQs. Every second of every day we’re wearing clothing produced by exploited female workers. I’d love the Fawcett society to address what we do about this.
But there is another issue. Whistles points to several accreditations held by CMT including Fairtrade and Oeko-tex. However, most of these standards cover the fibre and govern chemicals during processing – not the conditions or wages of employees. Codes of conduct remain voluntary and seem concerned with extreme scenarios. Fulfilling an order without actually killing garment workers still seems to constitute a ‘good supply chain’.
Yes, since Rana Plaza there have been a lot of brands painstakingly tweaking these codes – often unintelligible to the non-industry eye. Yet it is far from clear this kind of regulation will solve the problem.
The issue remains that the fast fashion business model is predicated on speed to market and the constant supply of new garments. The hands behind the fashion remain well down the industry’s list of priorities.
The Fawcett Society, which lobbies for greater gender equality, has launched an urgent investigation into claims that its latest campaign used T-shirts made by women in a Mauritius factory reportedly paid as little as 62p an hour.
The campaign group’s “This is what a feminist looks like” T-shirts were launched last week through branches of the fashion retailer Whistles and were worn by Labour leader Ed Miliband and deputy prime minister Nick Clegg as well as the actors Benedict Cumberbatch and Eddie Redmayne and the musician Tinie Tempah. Harriet Harman, Labour’s deputy leader and former minister for women, wore one in the House of Commons.
But the owner of the factory who made the garments admitted to the Mail on Sunday that the labourers earned 6,000 rupees a month – equivalent to £120 – and showed reporters spartan accommodation where they sleep up to 15 to a room on bunk beds.
The paper said that one worker told them: “How can this T-shirt be a symbol of feminism when we do not see ourselves as feminists? We see ourselves as trapped.”
The Fawcett Society has now issued an apology “to all those concerned who may have experienced adverse conditions” and promised to pull the £45 tops from sale if “concrete and verifiable evidence of mistreatment of the garment producers emerges”.
There is no suggestion that any law has been broken, but the claims will be particularly embarrassing for equality campaigners because low pay and poor conditions in the garment industry in south Asia disproportionately affect women.
On Sunday Jim Murphy MP, a candidate for the leadership of the Scottish Labour Party, attacked the charity’s lack of research.
“I don’t blame Harriet or any of the other politicians,” he said. “We have to look at how it happened. Those folk who seek to involve high-profile politicians in these entirely sensible sorts of photo opportunities have got to do a degree of due diligence, so they don’t inadvertently lead to this sort of controversy that does nothing to help the initial cause.”
The workers’ wages appear to be higher than the national minimum wage for unskilled workers in Mauritius, but are lower than the minimum poverty income level as set out by the Indian Ocean country’s National Empowerment Foundation.
Compagnie Mauricienne de Textile (CMT), which made the fundraising T-shirts, has a turnover of £125m and employs 10,000 workers.
The Fawcett Society had partnered with Whistles and Elle magazine on the campaign and said it had been assured the garments would be made ethically in the UK. Only when they received samples in early October did they see they had been made in Mauritius.
“We have been very disappointed to hear the allegations that conditions in the Mauritius factory may not adhere to the ethical standards that we, as the Fawcett Society, would require of any product that bears our name,” said Eva Neitzert, deputy chief executive. “As a charity that campaigns on issues of women’s economic equality, we take these allegations extremely seriously and will do our utmost to investigate them … we remain confident that we took every practicable and reasonable step to ensure that the range would be ethically produced and await a fuller understanding of the circumstances under which the garments were produced.”
When the Fawcett Society sought reassurance about standards at the factory, Whistles emailed back to say CMT is “a fully audited, socially and ethical compliant factory” and cited accreditations relating to the provenance and content of materials. Whistles also said it had full audit reports from the factory, using the industry-wide Sedex system, which should have included detail of wages earned by employees in the factory. Whistles last night declined to comment on whether it knew the women’s wages.
The Sedex audit in principle checks whether “wages and benefits paid for a standard working week meet, at a minimum, national legal standards”. It demands that “wages should always be enough to meet basic needs and to provide some discretionary income”. The same standards are demanded by the global Ethical Trading Initiative whose published list of members include Gap, Marks and Spencer, Debenhams, H&M, Primark, Jack Wills and Boden, but not Whistles.
In a statement, Whistles said: “We place a high priority on environmental, social and ethical issues. The allegations regarding the production of T-shirts in the CMT factory in Mauritius are extremely serious and we are investigating them as a matter of urgency … We carry out regular audits of our suppliers in line with our high corporate and social responsibility standards.”
It said CMT has “world class policies for sustainable development, social, ethical and environmental compliance”.
“This highlights that we still have poor conditions in supply chains that are mainly about women’s work,” said Clare Lissaman, an ethical trade consultant in the fashion industry. “The really big challenge for people managing supply chains is whether [the amount paid to workers] is enough for a living wage. This isn’t going away and we are deluding ourselves if we think that retailers here aren’t taking advantage of the rules the countries around the world make.”
She said that the wages and conditions being experienced by the Mauritian workers were “standard in the industry but the standard is not good enough”.
Paul Collins, spokesman for War on Want, said: “What is changing is that companies are becoming smarter about making ethical claims to reassure the public but the reality is that if you are a woman working in a garment factory in a developing country you are not going to be earning a living wage and there is no evidence that is changing. The auditing system has not solved the problem. That is why we say it is only British government regulation that can force the companies to behave in an ethical way and live up to their ethical claims.”
The Fawcett Society was originally very cautious about the fundraising scheme and “there were long conversations about the risks of working with a women’s magazine, with the narrow beauty ideals and aspirational lifestyle that they present”, Ava Lee, its policy and campaigns officer, wrote in a blog before the campaign launched.
“The decision to partner with a fashion magazine and high street store wasn’t an easy one,” Lee wrote. “The partnership took us out of our comfort zone. Fashion and feminism aren’t the most straight forward of bed fellows … After much hard thought we came to the conclusion that while we understand and agree with many of the valid criticisms that certain feminists will have of what fashion magazines reflect and perpetuate, it was an opportunity that we, as a small campaigning organisation, wanted to grasp.”
A women’s rights charity behind a T-shirt campaign is investigating claims by a newspaper that the products were made in sweatshop conditions.
The Fawcett Society has said it will have the clothes withdrawn from sale if the reports are proved true. The Mail on Sunday claim the T-shirts, worn by politicians – such as Ed Miliband, Nick Clegg and Harriet Harman – proclaiming their feminist credentials, are made by female workers being paid just 62p an hour.
The paper said its investigation found the shirts with the slogan “This is what a feminist looks like” were being produced on a factory in Mauritius where female machinists sleep 16 to a room.
The fashion retailer Whistles, which sells the garments for £45 each, described the allegations as extremely serious and said it would be mounting an urgent investigation.
The T-shirts hit the headlines last week when the Labour and Lib Dem leaders posed wearing them for photographs for Elle magazine as part of a campaign by the Fawcett Society – which receives all the profits – to promote women’s rights.
After David Cameron refused repeated requests to join them, Harman, the Labour deputy leader, wore one during prime minister’s questions.
The Mail on Sunday, which said it had toured one of six factories on Mauritius owned by Compagnie Mauricienne de Textile (CMT), which produces the garments, claimed that the workers were earning 6,000 rupees a month – equivalent to £120.
The paper said the figure was a quarter of the country’s average monthly wage and around half what a waiter earns.
Fayzal Ally Beegun, president of the International Textile, Garment and Leather Workers Union, told the paper: “The workers in this factory are treated very poorly and the fact that politicians in England are making a statement using these sweatshop T-shirts is appalling.”
Dr Eva Neitzert, deputy chief executive at the Fawcett Society, said they had been assured by Whistles that the T-shirts were produced to ethical standards.
She said the charity had originally been assured the garments would be produced ethically in the UK, and when they received samples in early October they noted they had been made in Mauritius.
The Fawcett Society told the Mail it was assured by Whistles that the factory was “a fully audited, socially and ethical compliant factory” and decided to continue with the collaboration.
“We have been very disappointed to hear the allegations that conditions in the Mauritius factory may not adhere to the ethical standards that we, as the Fawcett Society, would require of any product that bears our name,” Neitzert said.
“At this stage we require evidence to back up the claims being made by a journalist at the Mail on Sunday. However, as a charity that campaigns on issues of women’s economic equality, we take these allegations extremely seriously and will do our utmost to investigate them.
“If any concrete and verifiable evidence of mistreatment of the garment producers emerges, we will require Whistles to withdraw the range with immediate effect and donate part of the profits to an ethical trading campaigning body.
“While we wish to apologise to all those concerned who may have experienced adverse conditions, we remain confident that we took every practicable and reasonable step to ensure that the range would be ethically produced and await a fuller understanding of the circumstances under which the garments were produced.”
A spokesman for Whistles told the Mail: “We place a high priority on environmental, social and ethical issues. The allegations regarding the production of T-shirts in the CMT factory in Mauritius are extremely serious and we are investigating them as a matter of urgency.
“CMT has Oekotex accreditation [an independent certificate for the supply chain], which fully conforms to the highest standards in quality and environmental policy, while having world-class policies for sustainable development, social, ethical and environmental compliance.
“We carry out regular audits of our suppliers in line with our high corporate social responsibility standards.”
A spokesman for the deputy prime minister said: “Nick Clegg had no idea where these T-shirts were being made and can only assume that the Fawcett Society were unaware of the origins or they would not have asked him to wear it.
“He remains entirely supportive of efforts to ensure all women are treated as equals in this country and the world over.”
A Labour spokesman said the party was happy to support a campaign promoting equality, but added: “Anything else is a matter for Elle magazine and the Fawcett Society.”
The unseasonably warm autumn is making clothes retailers sweat, but it has brought an Indian summer for fruit growers and pubs.
Clothing retailers are among the biggest losers. Major chains including Marks & Spencer, House of Fraser, Debenhams and New Look have all brought out the red discount signs in the past few weeks as shoppers shy away from buying winter coats and woollies. Heavier clothing is typicallymore expensive than summer T-shirts, so a continuing heatwave will put a dent in profits for fashion stores at what is usually their busiest time of year. Last week, Debenhams chief executive Michael Sharp said the weather was “certainly not helpful” for his plans to deliver a more “prudent” approach to discounting this year in a bid to recover from last year’s grim performance. Littlewoods owner Shop Direct said earlier this week that it had found the market “bumpy” in the last few weeks.
On the other hand, vineyards and fruit growers are benefiting from the weather. British strawberry producers have seen their outdoor crops produce fruit for two weeks longer than usual this autumn and theyexpect to be harvesting fruit from glasshouses into December. This year’s raspberry crop was up by a quarter on last year and blueberries were up by 60%, as warm weather combined with new growing techniques to increase production. Kent-based wine producer Chapel Down said its harvest was up 40% partly thanks to a warm September.
Caravan parks, pubs, cafes and restaurants are also getting a boost from the sun. Cash and carry operator Booker said it was benefiting as cafes and leisure firms were staying open for longer than usual while pubs were getting more trade as customers enjoyed sitting out in their gardens. That helped Booker’s sales rise to £2.26bn in the six months to 12 September.
Victoria Beckham, the pop star, model and Wag who reinvented herself as a fashion designer, has topped a list of Britain’s 100 most successful entrepreneurs of 2014.
The woman formerly known as Posh Spice came in at No 1 in the list compiled for business magazine Management Today. The rankings are drawn up by assessing turnover growth and job creation over the past five years.
The magazine said of the designer, who opened a 6,000 sq ft (550 sq metre) boutique in Mayfair, central London, for her fashion brand last month: “Beckham is living proof that celebrity may be the most marketable commodity of all.”
Philip Beresford, who drew up the list, said it was “her finely tuned business acumen” that won her the top spot.
Since the 40-year-old mother-of-four and former Spice Girl set up her fashion business five years ago, her staff has grown from three to a 100-strong team with the latest turnover at £30m.
Offering leather credit card holders for £150, T-shirts for more than £700 and handbags for up to £18,000, she has seen sales growth of 2,900% and employment growth of 3,233%. “Deservedly she is number one in these two crucial measurements for success,” Beresford said.
The accolade follows her topping of a poll to find the greatest style icon at London fashion week in September.
Beckham spoke of her transformation from singer to designer in a recent Guardian interview, saying: “First time around I felt famous, but now I feel successful.”
She added: “I used to wear clothes which would make me stand out and now I don’t so much because I don’t feel I have anything to prove.”
Born Victoria Adams in Harlow, Essex, she burst on to the pop scene with the Spice Girls in the mid 1990s and married the England footballer David Beckham in 1999. The couple’s joint wealth is estimated at £380m, and she is credited as the driving force behind “Brand Beckham”.
She joined the other Spice Girls for a world tour in 2007/8, but chose not to perform a solo song, instead posing as though in a fashion show, in a nod to where her real ambitions lay.
Beckham launched her eponymous fashion label in 2008, and a lower priced diffusion label in 2011. As a businesswoman, she has demonstrated herself to be “an adept exploiter of her own celeb value”, according to the list. By 2011 she was a fixture at New York fashion week.
Her Dover Street shop opened in September, but she missed the official opening to speak to the UN general assembly in New York about her role in the UNAids campaign. Since then a steady stream of celebrities have been through its doors. It has been likened to an art gallery, with sparse interior, clothes hanging from chains on the ceiling or a jagged rail, and no cash tills as all purchases are completed through an iPad.
The “burgeoning entrepreneurial talent” of Britain’s Asian community is also evident in the list, said Management Today, with nine individuals or families making the rankings. They are led by brother-and-sister team Amit and Meeta Patel, in second place, just pipped by Beckham. The siblings’ London-based pharma operation, Auden McKenzie, specialises in the development, licensing and marketing of niche generic medicines, and is at the cutting edge of work into areas such as treating heroin addiction.
Mahmud Kamani, 50, of online fashion site Boohoo.com, is ranked third, while Julian Dunkerton 49, of clothing chain SuperGroup, claims fourth spot.
Apart from Beckham, the list includes 14 other women, up from 11 when the rankings were last published in 2011. Among them are software entrepreneur Suzanne Marshall-Forsyth and Cathie Paver, founder of Paver Shoes.
The top 100 were “real job creators”, said Management Today. “In five years, they have added more than 61,556 employees to their payrolls taking their head count to 158,189. This represents a 64% rise, and shows that in the critical area of productivity,(in which much of the UK economy is notably lacklustre) our MT 100 members are right on top of their game.”
Emma Bunton, 38, Baby Spice. She has guest-hosted on shows including GMTV, Lorraine and was a judge of Dancing on Ice. She presents a show on Heart FM and has two children
Melanie Brown, 39, Scary Spice. She has been a judge on a number of reality TV talent shows. She is currently a judge on X Factor and has three children,
Melanie Chisholm, 40, Sporty Spice . She has sold more than 12 million records as a solo artist, including collaborating with Bryan Adams on the hit “When You’re Gone”. She has also won acclaim in muscial theatre. She has a daughter.
Geri Halliwell, 42. Ginger Spice. She has recently appeared as a judge on Australia’s Got Talent and has one daughter.
Its stores are a big draw for British teenagers on holiday in the US with their parents, but next month American Eagle, one of the biggest youth clothing brands in America, will land in the UK.
Best known for its “all-American” look of jeans, check shirts and branded hoodies, American Eagle has had to make slight changes to appeal to the UK market, such as tighter jeans for male shoppers. But it is hoping to cash in on the trend for less brash branding, dubbed “normcore” by fashion-watchers.
“We’re a true American lifestyle brand,” says Simon Nankervis, who heads the retailer’s international business. “We already know there is a level of demand here,” he adds, referring to British Eagle fans who are paying customs duty and freight to ship its clothes over from the US.
A recent survey of the spending habits of more than 7,000 American teenagers by US investment bank Piper Jaffray listed American Eagle as young fashion shoppers’ second favourite clothing brand after Nike. Abercrombie & Fitch was not even in the top 10 – showing how swiftly fashion brand fortunes can change.
When A&F arrived in the UK in 2007 it caused a sensation, with teenagers queuing to get their hands on its jeans, joggers and hoodies, although it swiftly lost kudos when it emerged that British shoppers were being charged nearly double for identical products sold in American stores. Nankervis won’t confirm its prices – its website lists jeans at £25-£30 – abefore its first stores open in the south-east next month but says: “We are not naive. We know a customer can go online and see what a pair of jeans costs in the US.”
American Eagle’s teams have been sizing up the UK market since 2007 and Nankervis says the retailer, which targets 15- to 25-year-olds, has adapted to meet the tastes of British youngsters. “It’s not a case of what you see in Indiana, you see in New York and you’re going to see in London,” he says. “Our ranges will be differentiated because the guy in London wears his jeans tighter and the girls [follow] trends a lot quicker because of the proximity to Europe. It will be closer to what we do in New York than Middle America.”
With annual sales of $3.3bn and more than 1,000 stores in the US, American Eagle is best known for its denim. For many American teenagers the store provides their school uniform. The brand’s eagle motif can be plastered across the front of sweatshirts, but it is also used more subtly on jean pockets and on shirt tails.
Lorna Hall, head of market intelligence at trend forecaster WGSN, says American Eagle will face stiff competition when its stores open in the two London Westfield malls and Kent shopping centre Bluewater, but that the current vogue for “normcore” could play in its favour. Normcore celebrates pedestrian clothes – unbranded jeans and plain T-shirts – as a way of expressing individuality, with Hall pointing to Gap’s current marketing campaign which uses the tagline “Dress Normal”. “The normcore trend plays to the strengths of retailers that are good at the everyday basics people actually wear,” she says.
American Eagle hopes shoppers will be won over by choice: women’s jeans come in 45 colours and seven styles while men have to make do with a mere five fits in 36 shades – or washes, as they are called in the denim business.
The retailer also plans, perhaps bravely, to inject some American-style customer service into its stores. Like Starbucks with its coffee, it will encourage sales assistants to call customers by their name in the changing rooms.
Nankervis concedes that level of intimacy might frighten off some Britons but insists: “It is not about whether you buy or don’t buy, it’s about engaging with customers so the next time they are in the mall they think I must go to American Eagle because those guys are really nice and helpful.”
Donna Loveday, co-curator of Women Fashion Power, wants to get one thing clear from the start, when we meet at her office in the Design Museum: this is not, repeat not, an exhibition about power dressing. “I have deliberately avoided using that term. I don’t feel it represents either the way women think, or the way they dress” she says.
Power dressing it may not be, but this is undoubtedly a timely show. The discourse around how women in positions of power and influence dress has never been more fractious. In July, coverage of the appointment of new female cabinet ministers that labelled it the Downing Street Catwalk whipped up a media firestorm. But – as befits a show dominated by such figures as Margaret Thatcher, Angela Merkel and Joan of Arc – this is no passive taking-of-minutes on the contemporary argument. Instead, it is an exhibition with a strong agenda.
That agenda is to frame women as the protagonists in the story of what they wear, rather than the victims of fashion. Loveday talks a lot about “how women use clothes”, a format that places women in a dynamic role in their relationship with fashion, rather than seeing them as bound and enslaved by it. And there is another, deeper subversion. Fashion has become a popular subject for museum exhibitions, which tend naturally to place the designer in the spotlight, as artist and hero and creator. In this show, “the women are the heroes, not the designers”, says Loveday. How do designers – traditionally portrayed as the originators of new ideas in fashion – fit into this new picture? “Designers are looking at women. Women are the muses of fashion, and designers are responding to what they want and need, and particularly to changes in those wants and needs.”
Loveday wants the exhibition to be “the start of a conversation”, one which will nudge the discussion around women, power and fashion into a more positive light. After all, the phrase power dressing is inextricably linked to a specific look – the huge-shouldered, Dynasty boardroom suit – which represents a moment in history when women were breaking into traditionally male roles at a rate never seen before. It seems to link these suits to dressing-up-box costumes: there is a whisper lurking somewhere in this expression that power dressing is suspect, that women are dressed for roles they cannot or should not do.
By talking about women, clothes and society rather than about power dressing, Loveday wants to leave behind some of that negativity along with the words. As she says, “fashion is a language, after all”. The concept for the exhibition “came from a team meeting – I can’t take credit for it”, says Loveday. Her co-curator is the fashion writer and historian Colin McDowell, and the exhibition is designed by Zaha Hadid. The show will be officially unveiled by Anne Hidalgo, the first ever female mayor of Paris.
At the time of our meeting the show was yet to be installed, but it will open, says Loveday, with a section devoted to “identifying power through dress”, with images ranging from Boudicca and Elizabeth I to Hillary Clinton. This will be followed by a timeline, which is “not a history of fashion” but highlights key moments of political and social change from 1850 to today, as seen through the prism of what women wear. The choice of starting point is deliberate, at the height of the craze for tiny-waisted corsets: a corset with an 18-inch waist is the starting point for the story of dress reform, and how incremental societal shifts, rather than seasonal trends, drove changes toward a loosened-up silhouette.
The designers who star in this timeline are those who are catalysts for change and are, for the most part, women. Coco Chanel pioneered trousers in the early 20th century; Diane Von Furstenberg the laid-back, sexually liberated wrap dress in the 1970s; Vivienne Westwood punk and the challenging of conventional femininity; Donna Karan the Seven Easy Pieces for time-pressed working women in the 1980s.
The third and final room will be a series of 28 fashion portraits of contemporary women, from the fields of politics, business, culture and fashion. Each was asked to select an outfit that represented empowerment to them, and each has answered a Q&A about how clothes fit into their working lives. This, says Loveday, was the most nerve-racking part of putting on the exhibition. Women in politics and business, in particular, are often terrified that declaring an interest in fashion will have them pigeonholed as frivolous. “But one of the first women who came on board was Miriam González Durántez, lawyer and the partner of deputy prime minister Nick Clegg. She chose a Zara dress she wore to the Lib Dem party conference last year.” (In her Q&A, she describes her relationship with clothes as “uncomplicated” and in answer to the question of what percentage of her income goes on clothes, says: “I do not know. Much more since Nick is in politics.”)
Broadcaster and author Kirsty Wark was another early supporter of the exhibition. “She was one of the first women I spoke to, and her reaction was: what a great subject, why has no one done this before?” says Loveday.
The contemporary portraits are encouraging, says Loveday, in what they tell us about the way we dress now. “What came across really strongly was that it’s not about trying to play by someone else’s rules, any more. Clothes are about projecting personality, not about conforming.”
Wark says: “I do not have an outfit that would empower me. But I do have a beautiful Prada dress that I always feel great in.”
Morwenna Wilson, chartered engineer leading King’s Cross construction projects and, at 31, the youngest woman featured, says: “Clothes give you the opportunity to blend into the crowd or stand out from the crowd … My aim, generally, is to stand out from the black, navy and grey-suited crowd. A bright pop of colour makes people notice and remember you, and when you have their visual attention they can be more open to listening.”
There is also a more prosaic message, about practicality as a driver for changing fashion. “A lot of women talk about throwing clothes in a suitcase; women are very practical and conscious of clothes which will save them time. Akris, who make clothes for Princess Charlene of Monaco, told us that she has a lot of input into what they create. She even drives fabric development: they have devised a new fabric in order to make a cocktail dress that comes out of a suitcase crease-free,” says Loveday.
The exhibition spotlights how the shape of women in the public eye has shifted back and forth between ultra-feminine and quasi-masculine silhouettes. Boudicca and Joan of Arc appropriated masculine sartorial language with their battle dress. The suffragettes “chose to embrace femininity in their dress, because they were monstered for being unnatural and mannish, and to counterbalance that they had a deliberate tactic of dressing in a conventional, ladylike way. There’s a sense of power coming from embodying your gender, not denying it.”
The 1980s power suit itself is represented by vintage Mugler and Versace, while images from Dynasty and Dallas are used to show how the image of the power suit, borrowed from menswear, was disseminated through popular culture “at a moment when women suddenly had more power and visibility in the workplace”. A Kazakhstan businesswoman featured among the contemporary figures, who frequently networks at evening events, has chosen a lavish Dolce evening gown as the outfit that represents empowerment to her.
Is the exhibition, which focuses on very successful prominent women, elitist? “It might seem that way, but I think it’s pertinent to all women who work,” says Loveday. “I have found it has made me think about what I wear in a different way. I’ve always loved fashion, but it has prompted me to think more about clothes in terms of what I love, and what works for me, rather than automatically buying what I perceive as fashion. That seems like progress, to me.”
• Women Fashion Power is at the Design Museum, London, from 29 October to 26 April 2015
It has been more than half a century since Audrey Hepburn appeared on the cinema screen wearing the famous black dress in Breakfast at Tiffany’s that cemented Hubert de Givenchy’s reputation as one of the world’s great designers.
Yet it was not until Wednesday that the first major retrospective of the French designer’s four-decade career was launched – as a tribute to him and to haute couture, a fashion culture he believes may soon vanish.
The exhibition at Madrid’s Thyssen-Bornemisza museum features 95 pieces and accompanying accessories all chosen by Givenchy. It offers a window into his fixation with elegance and beauty, which earned him a roster of clients including Jackie Kennedy, Grace Kelly and Hepburn.
Wearing a grey suit, a blue shirt with a white collar and sunglasses indoors, Givenchy – who retired in 1995 – said he was initially sceptical about a retrospective.
“Imagine, at this age of mine? I was doubtful,” the 87-year-old said at the launch. “But I have great affection for Spain, so I thought I do not have the right to reject such an extraordinary offer.”
The result was what he called an “homage to those I’ve worked with and to my loyal clients”. His designs sit alongside artworks from the museum’s collection, in an effort to highlight the parallels between fashion and art.
Among those loyal clients, one stands out, said Givenchy, referring to Hepburn, who died aged 63 in 1993.
“Audrey was an exceptional person,” he said of his close friend and muse for decades. The pair met when he designed costumes for Sabrina, a 1954 film. “She was someone who knew how to wear an outfit better than anyone,” he said.
Givenchy,already had in mind which pieces he wanted to include, said curator Eloy Martínez de la Pera. “For us it was about haute couture. But for him, each piece was linked to a client of his and full of emotional memories.”
Martínez de la Pera said of the black satin sheath dress worn by Hepburn in Breakfast at Tiffany’s: “Seeing the piece, you can perfectly imagine Audrey Hepburn getting out of the taxi, moving towards the window of Tiffany’s while eating a croissant.”
The black lace cocktail dress and jacket she wore in How to Steal a Million in 1966 are also on display.
The museum had few problems finding exhibits. “We were overwhelmed,” said Martínez de la Pera. “Hundreds of clients wrote to us, offering us their pieces to include in the exhibition. We had to limit it.”
Their eagerness, he said, added weight to the feeling the retrospective was long overdue. “He’s the last great master of haute couture in the 20th century. It was an homage that we owed him.”
For Givenchy, what started as a retrospective soon became a chance to show off the heyday of haute couture.
Citing today’s fashion culture, where edginess has taken precedence over elegance, he said: “Maybe I’ll shock a lot of people here, but I think that haute couture has come to an end.”
While there may be streets in Paris that are full of boutiques, he said, “the things they are selling don’t make sense. The times have changed. What will happen, I don’t know.”
He paused before adding: “And I probably won’t be here to find out.”
• The Hubert de Givenchy retrospective at the Thyssen-Bornemisza museum in Madrid runs until 18 January, 2015.
Saint Laurent’s Hedi Slimane, Louis Vuitton’s Nicolas Ghesquière and Raf Simons will compete for the prestigious international designer award at the 2014 British Fashion Awards, it was announced today.
Other nominees for the most prestigious prize ceremony of the British fashion calendar include JW Anderson, who has been nominated for womenswear and menswear designer of the year. This is the first time the Irish designer has left the “emerging” and “new establishment” categories behind to be judged against established designers. Other womenswear nominees include Christopher Kane – last year’s winner – and Erdem, while the names in the running for the menswear category are Christopher Bailey for Burberry, Paul Smith and Tom Ford.
Victoria Beckham, Stella McCartney and Alexander McQueen have been nominated for brand of the year while Anya Hindmarch, Charlotte Olympia and Nicholas Kirkwood will be submitted for accessories.
Emerging womenswear talents vying for recognition include 1205, Thomas Tait and Marques’Almeida. The latter, which specialises in ripped, distressed denim, has recently launched a collaboration with Topshop. Astrid Andersen, Lee Roach and Craig Green – whose Japanese-influenced spring/summer 2015 catwalk show reduced fashion critics to tears earlier this year – are in the running for the emerging menswear designer prize.
Cara Delevingne, Jourdan Dunn and Sam Rollinson are nominated for model of the year, while red-carpet designer is being fought out between Alexander McQueen, Mary Katrantzou and Roksanda.
The awards will take place on Monday 1 December at the London Coliseum, hosted by Jack Whitehall. Last year’s winners included Miuccia Prada, who was presented with the prize for international designer of the year by Gwyneth Paltrow.
Amazing what the absence of a profits warning can do. Asos, which had delivered three in six months, had no fresh setbacks to confess on Tuesday and the share price rebounded 14%.
Is it back to races then? Should investors keep their eyes on “the very big prize”?, as the online retailer’s chief executive, Nick Robertson, puts it, that is “to be the world’s leading fashion destination for twentysomethings.” The next staging post is defined as annual sales of £2.5bn, which would be quite a jump from last year’s £975m.
Given the current rate of progress – a 27% rise in revenue, with Britain doing much better – Asos clearly has a sporting chance of getting there in the hoped-for five or six years. The question, though, is how much investment is required to service that growth, and what level of profit margin will emerge if/when the destination is reached?
Even a year ago, the Asos fanclub thought the company was capable of running with pre-tax margins of 7-8%. But that is off the table for the time being. Robertson has already said Asos will need to operate at 4-5% for a while as it improves its infrastructure (in Barnsley, and then at its “Eurohub” in Grossbeeren in Germany) and adapts its prices to local markets. The latter was the factor that caused havoc last year when sterling strengthened and twentysomethings in Australia and Russia found their dresses became 20% dearer.
Analysts’ new working assumption is that a 6% margin might be possible come 2019. That would imply pre-tax profits of £150m, compared with £47m in the last financial year. Terrific if it happens, of course. But, given that profits are set to be flat this year, a hefty dose of scepticism is required.
The past year has demonstrated that operating in 200 countries presents huge logistical challenges; the new local pricing model should solve last year’s headache, but others will emerge.
Rather than dream of what might happen in 2019, investors should take the current pulse: Asos remains a great pioneering business and Robertson deserves the acclaim. But the shares, even after the plunge from £70 to £22 since February, are rated at 50 times this year’s earnings. That’s expensive. Bulls are still expecting too much, too soon.
If rumours circulating are to be believed, Mulberry is finally on the verge of appointing a creative director – and Céline’s Johnny Coca is reportedly the front runner for the role. Coca has been head design director for leather goods, accessories, shoes and jewellery at the French label since 2010, during which time Céline has scored hits such as the Trapeze bag and posh satin skater shoes. To poach him would be a bit of a coup for the Somerset-based brand – in the doldrums since creative director Emma Hill left in 2013. While we wait for the news to be confirmed, here are five Mulberry meets Céline mash-ups we would love to see.
Mulberry was one of the first brands to jolly up classic leather designs with a more fashion-friendly colour palette. Its pale yellow and duck-egg-blue Bayswaters became the status arm candy in the late-noughties. Coca could transfer this simple yet effective formula to footwear, using the skater shoe shape.
Model Daria Werbowy is a bit of a poster girl for Céline – and perhaps her influence would come over with the arrival of Coca. With Mulberry fond of naming their bags after muses (see the Alexa, the Cara), the Daria could be next. All tawny limbs, with a penchant for sailing, expect something suitable for the high seas.
Both Céline and Mulberry agree on the appeal of the box bag – that’s basically what the Del Rey, introduced in 2012, is, and Celine’s Mini Doc bag isn’t that far away. It’s the perfect bag for arty young things to have draped across one sight shoulder. Oxblood is likely to be the shade of the leather.
The Alexa – a shoulder-held satchel shape named after Ms Chung – was a major hit for ex-creative director Emma Hill. At Céline, bags were held on the catwalk under the arm with the chicest of squidge. A clutch-satchel hybrid is a possible Mulberry-meets-Céline hit.
Mulberry is famous for putting dogs on the catwalk – so perhaps Coca will expand this, by providing elegant accessories for daschunds, boxers and pugs. Alternatively, the smaller breeds could poke out of well-designed totes – like Paris Hilton’s chihuahua but way classier.
In his blog last week, Alan Roberts, executive director international operations at the Accord on Fire and Building Safety, outlined the progress made by the Accord so far.
More than 175 primarily European brands and retailers joined the Accord, while 26 US and Canadian companies joined a second group, the Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety. Both initiatives are bringing companies together in an unprecedented collaboration to address common challenges of worker safety in the Bangladesh garment sector following the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh last year.
The Accord has invested considerable resources into inspecting factories that are the principal suppliers to its members. The Alliance has undertaken a parallel exercise and the two initiatives have now completed inspections of nearly 1,700 factories.
The breadth, scope, and speed of these inspections represent a significant accomplishment. In the absence of effective government oversight, brands and retailers are taking greater responsibility for fire and building safety. Roberts highlights that the Accord’s inspections have identified more than 80,000 safety hazards. In 33 factories, safety issues are so serious that the Accord and the Alliance have recommended that production be suspended because of the risk to workers. This is a sobering reflection of the state of factory safety in Bangladesh.
Inspections are an important first step in making factories and workers safe, but they are not enough. Eighteen months after Rana Plaza, there are two major unanswered questions pertaining to factory safety in Bangladesh: 1) how big is the total universe of factories and facilities producing for the export market, and 2) how will factories actually be fixed?
There is no authoritative figure for the number of factories producing for the export market. Between them, the Accord and the Alliance have acknowledged responsibility for about 1,800 factories. But a study (pdf) published earlier this year by the NYU Stern Center for Business and Human Rights estimated that the total number is closer to 5,000 - 6,000 factories and facilities.
The study also highlighted the essential role of indirect sourcing – subcontracting with limited control, visibility, or oversight – in meeting demand for high volumes of low cost garments. Indirect sourcing is not necessarily a bad practice, but keeping it in the shadows is and makes hundreds of thousands of workers less safe in Bangladesh.
While the Accord and the Alliance both have textual commitments to inspect subcontracting facilities, there is little evidence that this is happening in practice. Factories that fall outside these two initiatives are the responsibility of the government, which lacks the capacity to inspect – much less fix – unsafe factories.
The second unanswered question is how to fund factory upgrades or relocation. Accord and Alliance inspections have identified thousands of deficiencies in the factories that fall within their inspection programs. But to date, none of the major brands or retailers has made a public commitment to fund the upgrades and repairs that are needed.
Yes, both initiatives are identifying necessary repairs through publicly available corrective actions plans and have agreed to provide some funding for workers who are displaced by repairs (when factories close as a result of safety deficiencies, workers rightfully demand compensation).
But who will pay for repairs remains unclear. The Alliance estimates an average cost of $250,000 per factory. That’s more than $400m for Accord and Alliance factories alone. No company member of the Accord or the Alliance has made a public commitment to pay these costs.
In addition, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) has approved a $10m Global Trade Supplier Finance programme to help factory owners pay for repairs. But the IFC demands loan guarantees by western brands and retailers, which only a single company, VF Corp, has yet agreed to meet.
The accomplishments Roberts highlights in conducting inspections and identifying factory safety hazards are important. But workers and factory owners need to know next steps. Brands and retailers should work with Bangladeshi manufacturers, the government of Bangladesh, foreign governments, and development organisations to advance a comprehensive approach – underwritten by significant funding – to upgrade the entire export garment sector.
This will require an objective assessment of the scope of the problem, especially by identifying all factories and facilities producing for the export market. Such an assessment will raise challenging policy questions, such as establishing minimum safety standards for all factories, not just those with direct relationships with foreign brands. Setting standards has been a contentious issue in Bangladesh in the last year, and this process will require much-needed local leadership.
A task force with both local and international experts needs to be created, both to analyse the scope of the problem and to propose ambitious, practical next steps. The Accord and the Alliance should be part of this process, but it should be led by local stakeholders. Real progress on labour rights in Bangladesh will require a bigger vision, a more collaborative approach, and significant, consolidated funding.
This article was amended on Tuesday 28 October to correct that VF Corp is the only company to sign up to the International Finance Corporation’s programme. It previously stated no company had signed up to the agreement.
Sarah Labowitz is the co-director of the NYU Stern Center for Business and Human Rights and a fellow of the Truman National Security Project.
Read more stories like this:
The supply chain hub is sponsored by the Fairtrade Foundation. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
One of the differences between the new wave of feminism and previous ones is that feminists do not seem to care any more about what clothes women wear. Long gone are the days when being a feminist implied hating fashion and burning bras (as a 46-year-old woman who has had three children, I am naturally grateful for the latter). Indeed, since feminism has turned towards women’s freedom to take their own decisions in life, women wearing what they wish (be that plain, colourful, wide, narrow, on trend or outdated) fits neatly with that concept.
When it comes to clothes it is difficult to put the finger on what is gender discriminatory, because (unfair as that may be) first impressions of both men and women are often formed by how we look. A comment about women having to shorten the length of their skirts in order to be successful is clearly discriminatory. But if a businesswoman or female politician goes to a meeting in flamboyant clothes or shoes and people or the media comment on them, does it happen only because she is a woman? Would that happen if a businessman or male politician went to a meeting in flamboyant clothes or shoes?
Much has been written about women in power being judged mostly by their clothes (a newspaper’s parade, this summer, of female ministers as a models’ line-up being a reminder of how little things have changed since the 1960s for some). And yet there are many women in some of the highest positions in power (from Merkel to Lagarde and from Clinton to Rousseff) who are hardly ever judged by their clothes.
The same is true in the business world: nobody judges, for example, the (super-impressive) CEOs of easyJet, Morgan Stanley or the British Fashion Council by what they wear. So perhaps it is just a matter of exposure: the more women in power are known, the more they are judged by what they do and less for what they look like.
When we started the Inspiring Women campaign last year – which aims to introduce girls from state schools to female role models across the country – I was warned that some girls felt they had to choose between looks and brains, and that they often thought that “hard subjects” like physics or maths were not for “girls who like fashion”. However, one year after we launched the campaign, I have seen very little evidence of that – most of the girls I have talked to (and I have talked to many) are indeed perfectly aware that scientists can dress however they like.
It is refreshing that girls can look up to so many examples nowadays of successful women in the fashion world. In the UK alone, fashion is an industry worth £26bn, and it therefore offers many job opportunities, to girls as well as boys. That is why, as part of the Inspiring Women campaign, we are organising a Women in Fashion event with Vogue where we hope to expose girls to the wide variety of roles in fashion – from designers to models to CEOs, editors, window designers, hairdressers, make-up artists and photographers – and we will do so with role models (some of whom are also fashion models) who have reached the very top of the sector through their hard work and effort.
When at the Inspiring Women events I ask girls about who they look up to, the most recurrent name is Beyoncé, a woman who lives with daily public comments about her looks. But when I ask them why, the most recurrent answer is: “Because she is a great singer and works.”
So there you are – perhaps the new generation sees things more clearly than most of us.
To join the Inspiring Women campaign, register at inspiringthefuture.org and click on Inspiring Women or email Miriam at miriam.inspiringwomen@gmail.com
Vivienne Westwood, whose designs I love but which far exceed most people’s price range, including mine, announced this week that she feels clothes cost too little. “Clothes should cost more – they are so subsidised,” she said. “Food should cost more too – you know something is wrong when you can buy a cooked chicken for £2.”
In the midst of a cost-of-living crisis that has led to even people in employment resorting to food banks, no doubt many will find her comments unhelpful. A Cambridge University study released this month found that eating healthily costs three times as much as consuming unhealthy food, and I wouldn’t be surprised if the same were also true of eating ethically. Two free-range chicken breasts in my local supermarket cost between five and six pounds.
I was brought up in a household that was committed to animal welfare so we rarely ate chicken at all, and I still don’t. I grew up on lentils and cheaper cuts of meat, while jealously eyeing my friends’ turkey dinosaurs and spaghetti hoops. My family made sacrifices in order to live more ethically, but not everyone is prepared, or able, to do this.
This is not the first time that Westwood has made comments such as these. Last year she said poor people should buy fewer clothes, a statement to which I wanted to respond: “They do.” Granted, my early years came before Primark’s fast fashions began filling the wardrobes of the nation – the store is currently expanding its flagship behemoth to take up yet more of Oxford Street – but even if it had existed then, we couldn’t have afforded much anyway. When you don’t have any money, you can’t really buy anything. It’s that simple. When you have a very small amount of money, chances are you’re going to use it to buy things that don’t cost very much.
“Poor people can’t afford to buy cheap things,” my Grandma always used to say, and I think this is what Westwood is getting at. We all need to consume less, and invest in things that last, but it’s easier said than done when your child’s only pair of shoes has holes in and he starts school next week, your income support hasn’t come through, and you can’t think about anything other than the fact the rent is due. One of the main issues I had with the ethical fashion industry, in which I briefly worked, is that only rich people could afford to buy the clothes we were selling.
When people are struggling financially, there is no use getting on your high horse about ethical consumption, as I did after the Bangladeshi textiles factory collapse in 2013. Traumatised and angered by an image of a dead, dust-covered couple lying in each other’s arms, I was furious when a friend of mine continued to shop at Primark. Eventually she broke down in tears. “I can’t afford to look nice otherwise,” she told me. And let’s not forget that the messages about the importance of looking nice are all around us – especially for women. Opting out is easier said than done. I try: I buy fewer clothes, I go to charity shops. When I was younger, I read fashion magazines and stitched copies of the designer garments together for myself.
Westwood has forgotten what it is like to be poor: that, unless you are willing to eat only lentils and wear a literal hair shirt, living ethically and healthily are luxuries only the well-off can afford. But those relying on welfare are still exposed to the same diktats: the culturally embedded notion that a meal isn’t a meal unless it has meat in it, that appearances are everything, and that, even if you’re not rich, you can always make people believe you are, with a few fast fashion copies of more expensive clothes and your hair dyed over a sink. You might just pass the test, until all those chicken nuggets catch up with you and you become obese. You can never be too rich or too thin – that’s how the saying goes, isn’t it?
I don’t know what the solution is, but I do know that setting prices that render the poor even more excluded probably won’t help. I admire the healthy eating messages of Jack Monroe and Jamie Oliver, and would like to see the food industry take more responsibility. With clothes, it’s harder, because they signify so much about wealth and our ability to consume, and people really don’t seem to care about how much the person who stitched their skirt together was paid. Or they don’t have the energy to care. Caring is a luxury.
Having just unveiled a heavily sportwear-themed collection for H&M that in the words of Jezebel, makes you look like a funky scuba diver, Alexander Wang chose one of New York’s most illustrious sporting venues to launch it. Usually a track-and-field facility, on Wednesday night the Fort Washington Avenue Armory allowed its interior to be camped up for an evening that incorporated a fashion show, pop-up shop and gig by Missy Elliott.
Arriving so far north in Manhattan that some fashionistas were getting the bends, the black-clad hordes were ushered upstairs to an arena decked out in black sparkly carpet, over which was hung a cube of screens bearing the designer’s name and H&M’s logo. An athletics track surrounded tall black wooden structures and a couple of trampolines. The guests milled around drinking champagne to a soundtrack of 90s hip-hop and R&B while models of the moment including Hanne Gaby Odiele stalked among them, clad in looks from the entirely monochrome Wang collection – abs-baring tops, grey stripy leggings, puffa jackets and neoprene coats.
After the audience had taken their seats on bleachers, having first picked up a black foam Alexander Wang-branded boxing glove, a riff on the pointing fingers waved at sporting events (and by Miley Cyrus), the front-row posse made their appearance: Eddie Redmayne (wearing a black sweatshirt from the collection), Jessica Chastain, Dakota Fanning, Solange and Mary J Blige. Having loaned some A-list lustre to the budget-priced threads, the show was at last ready to begin. First a clutch of dangerously chiseled young men propelled themselves from trampolines and flipped atop the huge wooden boxes, parkour-style, and then the models emerged, strutting around the running track in body-conscious clothes suitable, as Wang claimed, for the street, the gym or the club. To underline the point, the outfits were accessorised with hockey sticks, masks, basketballs and black stripes on naked arms, backs and shoulders which at first looked painted on, but on closer inspection proved to be bands of some elastic-like material. Plenty of garments had “Wang” emblazoned across, H&M clearly unconcerned that the word is slang for penis in many of their most lucrative territories.
The show, which was not short on drama, concluded with an erupting glitter cannon, a standing ovation by Mary J Blige, and a victory lap by a beaming Wang. As the DJ played a selection of tunes including Kanye West’s New Slaves, which namechecks Wang somewhat critically, but which was played as though it was an unabashed big-up, the audience swarmed onto the catwalk and was inexorably drawn to the backstage area. Behind a curtain, a shop selling the collection had been set up. Given that H&M’s designer collections usually inspire hours of queueing by fashion die-hards and vanish from the stores in about half an hour (to return, at stratospheric prices, on eBay later the same day), it’s not surprising that the shop had an air of barely controlled hysteria, as fashion people expertly stripped the racks of the headline pieces. Perhaps slightly the worse for drink by this stage, even your correspondent was not entirely immune to the frenzy, bagging a black neoprene biker-style jacket for $99, undeterred by the fellow shopper who counseled kindly “You know that neoprene’s impossible to clean?”
Purchases spirited away to the cloakroom, the night finished with a gig by Missy Elliott. Though her best records are sublime, as a live performer she can be frustrating to say the least, and even tonight kept stopping the show, first to exort everyone to put their phones away, then to battle through the crowd to one side of the room and then the other in search of the night’s most ardent Missy fans. Still, it was a treat to hear Get Ur Freak on and Work It again, and Wang, who came onstage to dance to Lose Control, showed that he is a nifty mover as well as a designer. Tonight was his night, a collision of music, celebrity and fashion destined to propel both the designer and H&M into the commercial stratosphere.
Imitation may be the sincerest form of flattery, but it can also be deeply irritating, not to mention damaging to the bottom line. At least that seems to be the view of Converse, the distinctive brand of sneaker that has spawned multiple emulators.
On Tuesday, Converse Inc launched 20 separate lawsuits against 31 companies that it claims have adopted elements of its legendary Chuck Taylor shoe in breach of its trademark. Lodged in a New York federal court, the legal challenges call for monetary damages to be imposed against Walmart, Fila, Kmart, Skechers and several other companies.
Converse CEO Jim Calhoun told the New York Times, which first reported the story, that “the goal really is to stop this action. I think we’re quite fortunate here to be in the possession of what we would consider to be an American icon.”
Converse, now owned by Nike, began life as a rubber company set up specifically to apply the flexible material to shoes and boots. The All Star, with its recognizable star logo on the ankle, canvas uppers and white rubber toe caps, was originally designed in 1917 as a basketball sneaker but in 1934 was renamed Chuck Taylors – “Chucks” for short – after a basketball celebrity who joined the company as a salesman.
Having been a sports shoe, they soon crossed over to the rock scene and street fashion, becoming an essential element in the wardrobe of anyone who wanted to stamp themselves as an outsider.
Since 1917 about one billion of the shoes bearing the trademarked designs have been sold worldwide, Converse says.
The company is clearly hoping that a blitz of legal threats will have a cumulative effect on competitors. The 20 lawsuits include a complaint with the International Trade Commission, and Converse has already sent 160 cease-and-desist letters to companies it accuses of nabbing its trademarked designs.
Among the other companies sued are Kmart, Hitch Enterprises in Australia and Nowhere Co in Japan.
Tailors love the 16th-century Italian artist Giovanni Battista Moroni, as the Royal Academy – situated halfway between the bespoke shirt and made-to-measure pinstripe superhighways of Jermyn Street and Savile Row – has discovered.
The academy is about to launch the first major exhibition in the UK of the painter whose best known work shows a tailor in action, gathering together rare loans including his late religious paintings and altarpieces that have never left Italy before, and one portrait only identified as his work last year by the curators of this show.
The tailor, who has been in the Natonal Gallery collection since the 19th century, is the earliest known portrait of a craftsman engaged in manual labour, pausing to look enigmatically at the viewer, shears in hand and about to tackle a length of costly black fabric already marked up in chalk before him.
It’s not surprising that tailors love it: it shows a confident and immensly dignified man doing a skilled and well-paid job, rather than one who has done well enough to pay an artist to immortalise him as an aspirant aristocrat. Moroni’s tailor obviously has done very well, wearing a gentleman’s sword belt, a gold ring, and quietly costly clothing including frills of lace at his wrists and throat.
This was unique, curator Arturo Galansino said: “It had never been done before. The tailor is one of the most revolutionary portraits in all of art history.”
The painting was already well known by the 17th century in Venice, the luxury capital of Europe. Moroni was acclaimed, somewhat grudgingly, for the striking realism of his portraits.
One anecdote has a Venetian official based in Bergamo coming to Venice to try and commission a portrait from the most famous painter of the day, Titian. The master tells him to go back to Bergamo, where there is the best portrait painter famous for his naturalism.
This, Galansino says, was a double-edged compliment: naturalistic portraiture – although Moroni’s work is believed to have heavily influenced the young genius Caravaggio – was the least regarded rung on the artistic ladder, far inferior to bombastic history paintings or symbolism overloaded allegories.
However, Galansino points out that many of his other portraits are fashion and textile-history treasures, showing the quality of fabrics and the details of the construction of garments in pristine detail, as well as recording fashions which changed so fast that the gowns of two magnificently dressed young women changed completely inside five years. Isotta Brembati, coming on loan from a museum in Bergamo, where Moroni lived and worked for many years, was painted in about 1555. She is wearing a green and gold velvet gown, with the low-cut neckline grazing her nipples. Five years later another portrait shows an equally expensively dressed woman in pink silk brocade buttoned up to the throat, with a high lace-edged ruff.
Many of Moroni’s subjects, though magnificently and fashionably dressed – particularly men in the sobre blacks that were actually the most expensive colours because they took so much costly dye – have rough outdoor complexions, far from the waxy smoothness of many Venetian portraits.
“There is no doubt that Moroni is the greatest at showing you the person he is standing in front of, and not just the outer appearance but the inner man,” Galansino said. “But people would not have thought this was his most important work, and he would not have thought so himself.”
Relatively little is known about the artist, despite the curators’ attempts to draw together every scrap of recorded information. He was born in Albino in the province of Bergamo, found local civil and religious patrons, and is not recorded as travelling outside Lombardy though he is assumed to have gone to Venice. He died relatively young, in his 50s, and is said to have worked himself to death, completing all his commissions alone without studio assistants or pupils.
It was Moroni’s bad luck (and this, curators believe, explains why he isn’t a household name today) that his contemporary Giorgio Vasari never came to Bergamo and so didn’t know his work. Vasari’s pioneering work, Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors and Architects, which combined descriptions and criticisms of artwork with gossipy anecdotes about their makers, misses out Moroni completely.
He stands or falls by his work: Galansino thinks the exhibition will be revelatory.
• Giovanni Battista Moroni is at the Royal Academy, London, 25 October to 25 January 2015
On the cover of the new issue, out on Monday, Liu Wen – catwalk star, Victoria’s Secret Angel, Estee Lauder spokesmodel – is wearing a Celine striped knit tunic and skirt and 18-carat yellow gold Apple watch with a red leather strap. Chinese Vogue is a new addition to the venerable tradition of fashion magazines, but one that has had a huge impact in a very short time. The Chinese edition of Vogue is not yet 10 years old, and yet its readership of 1.3 million is bigger than that of the UK (where Vogue is 98 years old) and Italy (39). By making a splash in China, is Apple sending a message that it could have the same impact on the luxury market there?
Product placement is everywhere in fashion. The catwalks of every city are sprinkled with gadgets, mineral waters, crystals and furs that are there because their producers have paid to get them associated with those names. Apple made a point of being associated, instead, with people who can’t be bought, and therefore established the connection as real. The designer Azzedine Alaia hosted a Paris dinner for Apple Watch because he is best friends with Marc Newson, who has worked with Apple design guru Jony Ive on the watch. Karl Lagerfeld came to the Paris breakfast launch of the Apple watch because he is a huge Apple fan. (his cat Choupette has her own iPad.) Anna Wintour came because she’s a huge fan of Ive’s work. A profile of Ive in the new issue of American Vogue details his British tailor, Thomas Mahon (who also makes suits for Prince Charles), his collection of cars (Aston Martin, Bentley, Land Rover) and his London hotel of choice (Claridges).
Not just Marc Newson, product designer and one of Time magazine’s 100 most influential people in the world (as well as being married to stylist Charlotte Stockdale) but fashion strategist Anita Borzyszkowska, a former global head of PR for Gap and a best-dressed front rower in London, New York and Paris. Borzyszkowska was present at the Paris events alongside Paul Deneve, the man who put Hedi Slimane in charge at Saint Laurent and was then poached to Apple last year.
A luxury consumer will buy a Nike trainer because it is best in its class, and the thinking is they will buy an Apple watch for the same reason. Style and functionality have to be seamless. But Ive, a serious collector of watches, has respected the traditions of the form: for instance, there is a Milanese mesh stainless steel strap, albeit the first-ever magnetic one.
Ha ha. Obviously, a watch has to get the timing right. Plugging into the American energy of New York fashion week, with the Cupertino launch, and then hosting a virtual takeover of the penultimate day of Paris fashion work, was spot-on.
John Galliano has been confirmed as the new creative director of Martin Margiela. The news broke on Monday through Womenswear Daily, with an official announcement released soon after.
Renzo Rosso, the president of Margiela’s parent company OTB, said: “Margiela is ready for a new charismatic creative soul … John Galliano is one of the greatest, undisputed talents of all time – a unique, exceptional couturier for a Maison that always challenged and innovated the world of fashion.” His first collection for Margiela will be the artisanal line, shown in Paris during couture week in January.
This is the Gibraltar-born, British designer’s first appointment since his fall from grace in 2011, following racist and anti-semitic remarks to fellow customers at a Paris cafe. The incidents saw him sacked from Christian Dior, where he had been creative director for 15 years, and retreat from the wider fashion world to address substance abuse issues. In the last three years, he has emerged at various points, such as to design Kate Moss’ wedding dress in 2011 and, in 2013, to work on a collection for Oscar de la Renta. This year saw a rather more obscure project – in May he became creative director of Russian perfume brand L’Etoile.
Rosso has long been an admirer of Galliano and, in addition to Moss, the 53-year-old designer has retained other influential supporters inside the industry – with many of them taking to social media today. i-D magazine said it “put a spring in our step this morning” while Project Runway judge Nina Garcia tweeted “So happy! The world of fashion really needs John’s talent and everyone deserves a second chance.”
This second chance comes at a label which is itself entering a new era. Though he gave the brand his name when he launched it in 1989, Martin Margiela was famously secretive and designed collections while remaining entirely out of the limelight. He is believed to have retired soon after OTB – which also owns Diesel, the brand Rosso founded – bought Margiela in 2002. With a design team in charge since then, adding a big personality like Galliano – who, for his end-of-show bows at Dior, dressed up as a pirate or an astronaut – is bound to shake things up.
Controversy aside, the fit between the two isn’t the most natural. Since graduating from Central Saint Martins in London in 1984, Galliano – famously active on the club scene in London – has stood for fashion from a fantastical perspective, with historical muses like socialite Madame X and Madame de Pompadour on the mood board. Margiela, by contrast, comes from a conceptual stand point described as “non-standard elegance” with signature four white stitches on the back of a garment in place of a flashy label. When it comes to aesthetics, it’s opulence versus austere.
Where the Venn diagram crosses over is craft. To make the fantastical creations at Dior – with the corsets, flounces and full skirts of period dressing – Galliano has an impressive skill set honed by working with some of Paris’ best ‘petites mains’. This will appeal to Margiela, where the white muslin for toiles (blueprints of the clothes) was once used for a collection, and the construction of clothes remains a trope. While the big-budget blow-out occasions of Dior shows under Galliano are unlikely to be repeated, the January 2015 show of Galliano for Margiela – a new chapter for man and brand – will be eagerly awaited. The lead-up to the show, meanwhile, will allow Margiela fans to react to the news of this appointment.
SCREAMING GOLD CAPITALS, a 2in-wide calf-skin leather belt and zero holding-up power. To some, it’s just a belt. To others, it’s daft. Either way, as accessories go, Moschino’s logo belt pulls no aesthetic punches, which explains why the belt – one the most covetable accessories of the past 25 years – is now reportedly one of the most faked accessories too, with vintage experts suggesting more than three-quarters of belts in circulation are counterfeit.
Adam Skeleton, who sells 1990s Moschino pieces through his site Nothing-special, reckons 80% of eBay’s 150-odd belts are fakes. He has accidentally bought two and recently wrote a firm blogpost about how to spot one, including “letters that slide along the belt”. Gabrielle Roberts, the co-founder of vintage streetwear site Wavey Garms, thinks it is closer to 90%. She has sold more than 100 in the past 18 months, but such is the increase in fakes, she has had to implement a vetting system. “Real ones have Redwall, Made in Italy and the serial number embossed on the back,” she explains from her HQ in south London. “That and the letters are elongated or the holes are the wrong size [on the fakes].”
Of course, in an age of discreet branding, the belt isn’t for everyone. But it is for me, and I can safely say what my (vintage) one lacks in functionality, it makes up for in kudos. When I wear it, “hilarious” friends might ask me where it’s from, but I have since learned this reaction is rooted in bitter jealousy because the real ones are almost impossible to find. The prospect of it being fake is pretty devastating.
The belt’s ascent can be neatly linked with the rise of Jeremy Scott. A label known for its GSOH, last autumn Moschino hired the American designer as creative director. Wit and overt branding have been Moschino’s stock-in-trade for more than 30 years – much of the belt’s success comes via “advertising itself through the logo,” says a spokesperson – but Scott took it to the next level with his AW14 catwalk, which teemed with fast food branding and grinning models, and the SS15 collection in Milan last week, in which models actually rollerbooted down the catwalk.
The vibe worked, and reported sales under Scott are “up in triple and quadruple digits”, according to a spokesperson. Interest in the belt has never really diminished (it’s a “consistent bestseller”), but it doesn’t hurt that celebrity wallflowers Miley Cyrus and two-thirds of the Kardashians have just started wearing theirs. Prior to this counterfeiting era, Wavey Garms got £200 a piece; 18 months later, the ubiquity of fakes means that is more likely to be £100. The most desirable one is white, says Roberts, who can’t find one for love nor money.
Following Roberts’s advice, I check mine. The letters don’t move, the holes are precise and it has a serial number. Relax, Fashion – it’s real.
When George Osborne told the Institute of Directors that small companies felt “too daunted” to export to countries outside Europe, he could have cited the story of Mamun Chowdhury’s duffel coats as an inspiration to Britain’s manufacturers.
Chowdhury has made it by, as he puts it, “selling Britishness” – competing in the international rag trade from a small factory in the East End of London.
Arriving in London from Bangladesh in 1991, virtually penniless but with deep ambition, the clothing entrepreneur began his career in the UK by importing ready-made shirts from his home country.
A few years later he decided to concentrate on making duffel coats. “That’s my character, I always try to do something different,” Chowdury said. “No one else was making duffel coats.”
Memories of the 1971 war that saw Bangladesh emerge as an independent state from Pakistan helped shape his desire to make it in Britain (although the US had been his intended destination). Hundreds of thousands of people died, 10 million refugees fled and Chowdury’s family business was destroyed.
“It left an incredible scar,” said Chowdhury. “I was determined to succeed. If Michael Marks [of Marks & Spencer] could do it, why not me?”
But competition was fierce, especially at a time when the clothing manufacturing trade in the East End was in steep decline as manufacturers moved offshore – ironically, to places such as Bangladesh – so Chowdhury refined his strategy by making expensive duffel coats. In 2002 he set up a company called London Tradition with Rob Huson – who had worked in textiles with companies such as Marks & Spencer and Aquascutum – making coats that start at £300 and sell for as much as £1,500.
These high-end coats are a far cry from the simple garment that kept sailors warm in the first world war and was worn by Field Marshal Montgomery, who used it as a prop to encourage the troops to think that he was one of them. The London Tradition coats come in colours ranging from camel to purple and scarlet red, in various lengths and patterns such as tartan, and have proved to be particularly popular in Japan for shoppers who want a little piece of England.
The company now exports 30,000 to 35,000 coats a year, 90% of its output, and has seen overseas sales rise by 865% between 2007-2013. In July this year the company won a Queen’s award for international trade and there has been praise from the likes of Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, his predecessor Ken Livingstone, and George Osborne, the chancellor.
Today, London Tradition operates from a factory in Hackney Wick, close to the Olympic park. The area was once home to a thriving clothing and footwear industry that employed more than 15,000 people in the early 1900s. As late as the 1960s Hackney was noted for its large factories for men’s tailoring, shirts and clothing accessories. But the industry all but disappeared from the area in the 1970s and 80s, during Britain’s general industrial decline.
Now Hackney Wick is enjoying a revival. It is full of twentysomethings attracted by affordable rents, catered for by an increasing number of bars and cafes, and has its own arts festival – while London Tradition employs 100 people to produce on average 1,000 coats a week.
“Manufacturing used to thrive in east London, where high-quality garments were made. Now there are so few manufacturers left,” Chowdhury said. “London Tradition has local people continuing that heritage, with skills being handed down generation to generation. ‘Made in England’ is highly valued and I want to spread the revitalisation of the area, but it is not possible unless our clothes are of world class standard.”
The irony of being an immigrant heading a successful manufacturing company in east London making duffel coats for export is not lost on Chowdhury. But asked whether he had considered moving manufacturing to Bangladesh, where costs would be much cheaper, he said such a step would undercut a brand that relies on its London roots to sell its duffel coats. “We are selling Britishness,” he pointed out. “It would be suicidal to move away from here.”
Fast fashion is the way most of us buy into a trend – millions of us, in fact. The proceeds all end up in someone’s pocket, of course, but the actual humans behind the brands tend to stay out of the limelight – busy counting their profit, perhaps. Forbes, however, has released the latest American Billionaires List (dollars not pounds but still), and it numbers a fair few faces from fashion. Here are the fashion billionaires you’ve never heard of, behind the high-street brands you most certainly have.
Relatively new to the UK high street, the Elle Woods pink of the Forever 21 bag is becoming a familiar sight. The chain is owned by a husband-and-wife team, Korean-Americans Do Won and Jin Sook Chang, with daughters Esther and Linder in the business too. Together they earned £3.21bn this year – not bad considering that dresses in their shops go for under £15 a pop. That’s a lot of pops.
The owner of Victoria’s Secret could play the granddad in the Werther’s Original advert – that’s how wholesome he appears. His looks contrast somewhat against a brand that makes its money from images of young women in underwear, but the 77-year-old clearly knows sex sells. He bought Victoria’s Secret for $1m (£62,000) in 1982 and he’s now worth £3.9bn.
The matriarch of Gap, Fisher is also an art buff – with an extensive collection of works by 60s American greats such as Andy Warhol, Roy Lichenstein and Chuck Close. Her art haul is almost as valuable as her work with Gap, and will be available for all to see when a wing of the San Francisco Museum of Art opens in 2016. She is worth nearly £2bn, while her three sons combined are worth £4.46bn.
In his spare time, Hayne makes cheese in the Doe Run Dairy Farm in Pennsylvania. As the CEO of Urban Outfitters, however, he’s more often found dealing with production of slogan T-shirts than curds. The youth-focused high-street chain, in the UK since the late 90s, does swift business selling hipster-lite clothing and paraphenalia. Hayne earned £0.95bn – or $1.54bn – last year.
On Tuesday 30 September 2014 the unthinkable happened: feminism entered the realm of high fashion. In the finale to the most anticipated show of Paris fashion week, Chanel models strutted down the catwalk brandishing placards demanding women’s rights, in a faux protest that was simultaneously hailed as a breakthrough for a new wave of feminism and decried as consumerist claptrap.
Under the soaring roof of the Grand Palais, along a catwalk fashioned to look like a chic Parisian boulevard, Karl Lagerfeld’s models swapped handbags for banners; pouts for protests against machoism. The world’s highest-paid models Gisele Bündchen and Cara Delevingne shouted through megaphones – encased in lush leather padding, and heavily branded with the Chanel logo – but when they used the traditional rally cry: “What do we want?”, the answer, according to those in the audience, was indistinct.
Towards the rear of his impossibly beautiful troupe a lone man held up a placard with the slogan “He for She”, a nod to the UN solidarity movement fronted by actor Emma Watson, which is pushing for men to speak out in support of gender equality.
Coming little more than a week since Watson’s impassioned and widely reported speech on feminism, the show was further proof of the movement’s momentum, said Trish Halpin, editor-in-chief of Marie Claire, who watched the show unfold. “I think it just emphasises the fact that feminism is having a very, very good year – the movement has an incredibly high profile at the moment, which culminated in the Emma Watson speech at the UN,” she said.
While Halpin noted that Lagerfeld was known for his sense of humour, the show was not, she thought, simply a joke. “I think he was harking back to Coco Chanel’s feminist values – she was very much a strong and empowered woman. I think this just shows that fashion, feminism and empowering women do not have to be mutually exclusive.”
Others in the fashion press hailed “the fashion industry’s feminist battle cry” with fashion bloggers such as Amy Odell, editor of cosmopolitan.com, tweeting: “Awesome feminist statement at Chanel – for once do not care a flip about the shoes because THIS IS EVERYTHING.”
But some established feminists accused the designer – who has previously criticised the singer Adele for being “a little bit fat” and stated that “no one wants to see curvy women” – of jumping on a feminist bandwagon in order to sell designer handbags. Writing in the Guardian, Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett suggested that the movement had been appropriated by the designer and his fashion house. The slogans held up by models – including “Boys Should Get Pregnant Too” and “Make Fashion Not War” – could be the “inner script” of a “talking feminist Barbie doll”, she said. “It is the fate of any counter-cultural movement to become co-opted and repackaged. The market dictates, and the market has decided feminism is cool.”
Natasha Walter, author of Living Dolls: The Return of Sexism and founder of Women for Refugee Women, called the mock protest “quite amusing” but warned that using feminism as a trope could backfire. “It is great to see more young women engaging with feminist ideas all the way from talking about them on social media to actually getting active, but real change requires huge social, economic and political shifts. If people start thinking that feminism is suddenly fashionable, then the danger is that the next moment they will say it has fallen out of fashion,” she said. “There is a cynicism here – Lagerfeld is recognising that feminism has an energy at the moment, but is just using that to flog expensive clothes.”
She also noted that the women carrying “feminist placards” - one declared its carrier to be “Feminist But Feminine”, while another stated “Ladies first” – were mainly white, and uniformly beautiful and thin – an image that did little to dispel the idea “that we have some how failed if we don’t live up to that idea of beauty”.
In a world where feminists, according to Watson’s UN speech, are seen as “too strong, too aggressive, isolating, anti-men and unattractive”, having some of the world’s most attractive women declare their support for the cause was welcome, said the feminist campaigner and writer Caroline Criado-Perez.
“I don’t think this suddenly means Karl Lagerfeld has renounced misogyny and embraced feminism, but I think we have to be positive about people wanting to talk about feminism, which has become such a part of popular culture that we are even seeing it in fashion shows,” she said. “I think we need to embrace anything that highlights the fact that women should be equal, but they aren’t.
“We live in a culture where young girls are scared of being identified as feminists, so anything that shows feminism isn’t this scary horrible thing run by man-hating women has to be a positive thing,” she said.
Next has warned that sales have been lower than expected during one of Britain’s warmest Septembers on record and that if similar weather continues throughout October it could be forced to reduce annual profit guidance.
In an unscheduled trading update, the fashion retailer said cooler weather in August caused several strong weeks of sales but that the effect was reversed in September. As a result, sales for the third quarter are up 6% compared with the company’s forecast of 10%.
Next predicted at its annual results on 11 September that pretax profit for the year ending in January would rise by as much as 17% to £815m. It has left the forecast unchanged but said it was likely to be lowered if the weather stayed mild.
The company said: “Our experience suggests that some lost sales are regained when the weather turns. However, if this unusually warm weather continues for the full duration of October then we are likely to lower our full-year profit guidance range of £775m to £815m.”
Next’s statement is the latest sign that fashion retailers are struggling to shift winter clothing with September temperatures more akin to those of summer. September has been the driest for more than 100 years.
Marks & Spencer, House of Fraser, Debenhams and New Look are all offering discounts early in their new season.
Next shares fell 4% to £65.80 while M&S was also dragged lower, falling 3.5% to 400p. Debenhams and the fashion brands Ted Baker and SuperGroup also fell.
Next’s strong August sales came partly at the expense of M&S, which suffered a 0.6 percentage-point decline in its share of the clothing market, according to Kantar Worldpanel figures reported in the Times. Next stood firm amid heavy pre-Christmas discounting by rivals such as M&S and Debenhams last year. M&S has resorted to promotions in recent weeks, offering 20% discounts despite promising it would cut back on any discounting.
Retail analyst Nick Bubb said: “Mighty Next has, out of the blue, warned today that because of ‘the recent spell of unseasonably warm weather’ sales are only running at plus 6% in Q3 to date. Next are probably being unnecessarily cautious, ahead of investor meetings this week, but the market is unlikely to take any chances.”
Next said it published the statement to the stock exchange because it was about to sit down with big shareholders who will ask about trading given the heavy discounting on the high street. Informing the market would allow it to have open conversations in those meetings, it said.
You can measure the scale of Rebekka Bay’s job by the mighty view from her desk. We are on the 11th floor of the Gap headquarters in Tribeca, New York, where, as creative director, she commands her empire from a glass-walled corner office. Supersized marble meeting table; shelfie-ready stacks of art reference books; a Frank Stella print in the waiting area outside. And a view to the south-west, over the Hudson river, that is so beautiful at sunset that “between five and six o’clock, I don’t do any work. I just stare at the light.”
Sunset downtime notwithstanding, Bay, 44, has her work cut out. Her pedigree as the creator of H&M’s upscale, minimalist offshoot label Cos won her the Gap job, which she took on two years ago. It was a huge jump in scale, and profile. Cos is sold in 90 stores; Gap is sold in 1,700 stores worldwide, its performance under the spotlight of business pages globally. The size of the business means long lead times, so that the first collection overseen by Bay hit stores only this spring; this month sees the launch of the autumn collection, the first for which Bay has had her full team in place.
Gap is a huge ship to steer, and one that has lost its way. The darling of the American high street in the 90s and early noughties has been steadily losing ground for a decade. Once the go-to brand for contemporary basics, it has been assailed by a pincer-attack of industry game-changers: fast-fashion brands such as Zara have stoked an appetite for never-ending newness, while value labels such as Uniqlo offer the clean-cut jeans, padded jackets and T-shirts that were once Gap’s bread and butter, only with a lower price tag. The challenge of turning Gap around defeated Patrick Robinson, a designer who already had Armani, Perry Ellis and Paco Rabanne on his CV when he was hired with great fanfare in 2007 – and then let go in 2011.
At 8.30am, the door to Bay’s office is already open; I can see her bent over her BlackBerry, typing furiously. I knock and she stands to greet me with a smile and a handshake, and pulls two chairs together, so we can sit close. She is warm, has a slight Danish accent and is unselfconsciously attractive in that sunny, non-coquettish, Scandi-blond way. There is no grandiosity, no affectation. Bay is wearing a collarless, tunic-styled white shirt (Gap) and ankle-skimming jeans in washed-out black (Gap), with black Birkenstock sandals. In almost every photograph I have seen of her, she is wearing a white shirt and dark jeans or trousers. “A white shirt is kind of my uniform, because it always feels right,” she says. “I have friends who ask how it can be possible that I work in fashion, when I’ve worn the same thing for 25 years. I try to explain about nuances.” She laughs. I try, and fail, to imagine Karl Lagerfeld’s mates teasing him about what he wears to work.
What makes Bay’s job so tough is that while Gap is omnipresent – is there anyone reading this who doesn’t have a piece of Gap in their wardrobe? – in a way she doesn’t work in fashion at all. Mickey Drexler, the legendary CEO of Gap in its most profitable years, preferred to compare it to grocery shopping. In a Fortune magazine cover story in 1998, Drexler put it like this: “If you go into a supermarket, you would expect to find some fundamental items. You would expect to find milk: non-fat, 1%, 2%, whole milk. You’d expect the dates to be fresh. You want butter. You want certain types of bread. You have your list. I don’t know why apparel stores should be any different.” A Gap T-shirt is meant to be as fundamental a buy as a box of Kellogg’s cereal or a bar of Cadbury’s Dairy Milk.
Here, Bay says, her outsider status works to Gap’s advantage. “You need to be a foreigner to see the glamour in Campbell’s soup and Oreos. I really feel that excitement, and I want to celebrate that Americanness. My vision comes from my emotional Gap archive, which is about an American uniform: five-pocket jeans, khakis, T-shirts.”
The Gap take is an antidote to the aspirational-preppy, Ralph Lauren Wasp vision, more rooted in an idea of Americana that is sentimental, but democratic: road trips, watching games from the bleachers, coffee refills at the diner counter. On the window ledge in Bay’s office, just below the view, I notice a sumptuous coffee-table tome entitled Rock The Shack: The Architecture Of Cabins, Cocoons And Hide-outs.
This democratic vision is what made Gap fly. Think of the Khakis campaign, which featured casual portraits of American icons – Ernest Hemingway, Muhammad Ali – wearing khakis. Recently, Bay has been looking at Irving Penn’s Small Trades series of portraits of 1950s craftsmen and women in their working clothes – a cobbler in his heavy apron, a seamstress with her spectacles and pockets – in which the utilitarian garb of the sitters contrasts with the classical dignity of the photographs. The fabrics are rough and simple and worn, but their character is lovingly captured. There is little colour in the pictures, and “there is something about the way black washes in different fabrications that is really interesting”, Bay says. On the shop floor, this inspiration will translate into “black washes, but not stark black – an assortment from the darkest, inkiest black to a black so washed out that it’s a pale, pastelly grey. It’s a romantic take on something quite grungy.”
Romance and emotion are words to which Bay returns again and again. “Gap is democratic, but it is aspirational as well. The idea that a simple T-shirt can be something more, the idea that you can wear a man’s simple shirt and look so sexy, that the product allows you to shine through. We need to deliver on that promise in everything we do. So it’s just a T-shirt, but there’s something in the drape of the neckline that makes it a little bit more. I always tell myself: if I put this T-shirt on a girl, I should want to be her.” In this sense, Bay reminds me a little of Jenna Lyons, the creative director of the more upscale American high-street name J Crew. Bay is softer, more easy-going, but they share a slightly geeky, straight-talking sense of what a garment stands for.
As well as emotion and glamour, a fashion brand needs constant newness. The customer who automatically drops a box of Coco Pops into her trolley each week, or picks up a bar of Dairy Milk as a petrol-station treat, has no such loyalty when it comes to buying clothes. “Being relevant is super-important to me,” Bay says. “I’m not trying to replicate high fashion or the catwalk, but Gap needs to be as relevant as Saint Laurent, just with a different customer target. And it is right that there should be some kind of connection between what we are doing and what Hedi Slimane is doing at Saint Laurent, because we are all tapping into the same collective mindset.”
Before Cos, Bay worked in trend forecasting. “I really believe in the concept of a collective mind, and how we gravitate towards something. Tapping into that is about picking up on how everyone is concerned with travelling. Or with local. Or with ecology. Those are the big ideas that we need to pick up on. Somehow you have to take that mood and describe it in a colouration, or a shape. Take this season. I think this is an anxious time, an uncertain time, there’s a lot of conflict in the world, so we gravitate towards something that’s close to home and romanticise that. I started with Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love, because there was something about them that felt very raw and real, and yet very romantic. And very American. And I translated that into all washed black denim, and soft rose-pinkish colours, and babydoll dresses.”
As a child in Silkeborg, Denmark, Bay “didn’t want to do fashion at all. As a kid, I always wanted everything in advance of everyone else. I wanted a camel sweater the year before everyone else wanted a camel sweater, which meant I never ever looked fashionable, because I was a little bit early on everything. For a while I wanted to be an architect. I wanted to communicate, to describe an emotion, and I wanted to do that visually. And in the end, well, clothes are faster than buildings. I am not sure I have the patience to be an architect.”
As part of her application for fashion school, she designed a collection to fit in a suitcase for a trip to America. “It was kind of a grunge collection, with floral dresses and big cardigans and biker boots. But I wrote in my assignment that I had left a space for a pair of jeans, because I would buy those when I got to America.” At college, Bay felt at odds with her surroundings. “This was in the era of the Antwerp Six, of Comme des Garçons, and fashion schools were very purist, all about artistic expression and design. I wanted to talk about how fashion was influenced by culture, so I was a little out of my time there.” After graduation, Bay spent eight years in London, working as a trend forecaster for Volvo, Nissan and Dunhill.
A grounding outside the fashion bubble has given Bay a clear-eyed realism that should serve her well. “The second biggest change, moving to Gap, was shifting from Europe to America – that was a huge shift – but the biggest challenge of all is the scale of this company: how much you have to dial up to communicate. At Cos my voice could be quite intimate, but that won’t work here. If I want to do pretty, I can’t hint at pretty, I have to exaggerate pretty. I have to do floral on a babydoll dress and there have to be lots of them on the shop floor.” Internally, she is learning to speak louder. “I talk a lot. I try to create very clear frameworks, guardrails, product matrixes. And to make those very clear, because you can’t expect anyone to deliver unless you really explain to them exactly what it is they need to do. I spend very little time on my own at work. I wish I had more time alone, because it does get exhausting, but the only way to get everyone engaged in what you are doing is to have lots of open dialogue. Often, we have meetings of 20 people, and maybe just three or four people in that room could make those decisions, but by having more junior people in the room, you deepen their understanding. And Gap should be democratic inside as well as out, so it’s good to hear lots of opinions.” Famously, Bay kicked off one of her first design meetings by announcing, “Anyone who doesn’t have an opinion can leave the room now.” (“I’m Danish,” she laughs, and shrugs.)
One of Bay’s formative Gap memories comes from 2006, when she was living in London. It was the Christmas when Gap sold the multicoloured “Crazy Stripe” sweater, and everyone wanted one. “I wanted to wear it, I wanted to buy it for my sister and my mother. I went to every store in London, and it was sold out everywhere. I nearly got on a train to Manchester because a sales assistant on Oxford Street told me they still had some there. It was a happy stripe that made you smile, but it was also super-chic, super-tasteful.”
She never got that train to Manchester, but this winter the Crazy Stripe will be back in store, in a subtly updated form. “I’ve put it in my first winter collection, so that I have a chance to buy it. And because I really believe in that stripe. It’s got spirit.”
Fashion retailers are getting out the discount signs as warmer than average weather hits sales of knitwear and coats.
Major chains including Marks & Spencer, House of Fraser, Debenhams and New Look are all offering discounts only weeks after the new season’s stock has hit stores.
Marks & Spencer is offering about a third off a selection of knitwear, dresses and tops in a five-day “VIP” sale this weekend, while rivals Debenhams and House of Fraser are offering 25% and 30% off new season stock respectively. New Look is advertising discounts of up to 60% on its website. M&S has also been sending out 20% off vouchers to shoppers on its database, despite promises to investors it would cut down on discounting and build profit margins this year.
Analysts suggested M&S’s discounting activities combined with continuing issues at its online store might affect that promise but M&S said it was following a “planned promotional calender” and the discounts were limited to a small selection of clothing.
The high street chains are trying to tempt back shoppers as the UK enjoys an Indian summer with temperatures average 18.4C in the first half of September, nearly 2C above average for the time of year. There has been slightly more sunshine and a lot less rain than usual according to the Met Office.
Fashion retailers endured a 9.6% fall in sales in the week to 21 September according to figures from accountancy firm BDO which regularly surveys mid-sized chains including French Connection, Oasis, TM Lewin and White Stuff. John Lewis, the department store, said its fashion sales were down 6.9% in the week to 20 September compared with the same week a year before, although sales of furniture and electrical goods were strong.
“With the recent warm weather and temperatures up to 25C customers were not in the mood just yet for buying cold weather products,” John Lewis said in its weekly sales update.
A 79-year-old grandmother famous for her lemon drizzle cake might not sound the most obvious style-setter, but Mary Berry, now on her fifth series of The Great British Bake Off, is giving Rihanna a run for her money.
For Thursday’s episode, Berry’s new hairstyle garnered admiration on social media, but it is her jackets that continue to win compliments and get shop tills ringing.
Across blazers, bikers and bombers, the baking judge has developed a signature look since the show began in 2010 – with print and colour brightening up the baking tent. This season, the Marks & Spencer crane bomber jacket worn in episode seven was a particular hit on Twitter. While no longer in stock by the time the episode aired, the store saw it as an opportunity to promote other similar styles on their website.
“Mary consistently looks sophisticated and modern,” said the store’s style director, Belinda Earl. “We were thrilled when she recently wore M&S.”
This isn’t just the usual celebrity endorsement: retailers are now familiar with the Berry effect. With up to eight million people tuning in to watch every week, Berry gives them huge exposure for their product. When she wore a Zara tropical print bomber jacket in 2012, Nick Grimshaw tweeted that she looked “dope” and the style sold out within days.
In a somewhat unlikely twist, she arguably had more hand in the bomber jacket going mainstream than Ryan Gosling, who wore one to play a getaway driver in 2011’s Drive.
First as a cult favourite, Berry’s fashion influence has grown rather than faded. Hannah Almassi, the fashion editor of Grazia magazine, explains the appeal of Berry. “What Mary has been choosing to wear looks fresh and striking but not inappropriate, unapproachable or boring,” she says. “She’s mastered the art of showing her personality without detracting from the job that she’s there to do.”
Berry’s clothes are also, crucially, attainable: they come from high street stores including M&S, Zara and Oasis.
Notably, her style reach stretches beyond women of a similar age. Glamour magazine, a publication aimed at women in their 20s and 30s, ran a feature with Berry in their September issue, and Almassi pits her alongside much younger celebrities. “Jessie J may wear her bomber with hot pants and good hoops,” she says “but with simple jeans Mary always looks comfortable and casual, yet still put together.”
“She’s encouraging women of 20 or 80 to try something new,” says Nicola Rose, fashion and creative director at Red magazine. “She’s showing there are opportunities in fashion and you don’t have to conform.”
Berry fits into a growing appreciation of older women’s style across fashion, more typically a world with youth as its focus. Almassi points to cult fashion favourite Iris Apfel, the 93-year-old who inspired a range of shoes from Jimmy Choo, and the popular blog Advanced Style, which posts photographs of stylish older women and served as a casting pool for Lanvin advertising.
Lena Dunham is currently producing a TV series based on the memoir of Bergdorff Goodman’s personal shopper, 85-year-old Betty Halbreich.
And the influence of Berry, beamed into living rooms every week, shows no sign of waning. “When I get to Mary Berry’s age, I don’t want to wear beige,” says Rose. “If she’s our style icon, I say applaud it.”
The dozens who queued from the early hours of Thursday morning to be among the first to enter Victoria Beckham’s imposing flagship store were greeted with a carefully designed 6,000 sq ft space more akin to an art gallery than a shop.
The store, over three floors in Dover Street, London, is dominated by dark-mirrored walls and an imposing polished concrete staircase, the clothes hanging from chains on the ceiling or a jagged rail.
The shop, Beckham’s first since she launched her fashion line in 2008, is the culmination of over two years of work. Architect Farshid Moussavi, whose modern, angular aesthetic reflects the same qualities as Beckham’s fashion line, has carefully considered every detail of the shop.
The diagonal grid ceiling of the second floor alone took seven builders, seven days a week for nine weeks to complete.
There are no tills to interfere with the sparse design – all purchases are made through iPads – and there is no mannequin display in the window.
The 40-year-old designer skipped the official opening to speak to the UN general assembly in New York but her husband David was one of the first through the door. The line of chauffeured Land Rovers parked outside the shop gave an indication of the steady stream of customers inside; they were each handed a glass of champagne as they entered.
One shopper, who left the store the proud owner of a “little black dress” and a pair of sunglasses, spoke glowingly.
“The shop is a real showcase for the beautiful pieces: architecture-wise it is so impressive and it lets the clothes speak for themselves,” she said, “She’s so stylish isn’t she and her collection is just so lovely so it’s brilliant. I’m a long-term fan of Victoria and I think her style is fabulous and things you can wear forever. This shop is a real testament to that.”
Lujain Alfulaij, 31, was similarly impressed. “The store is huge and beautifully done,” she said. “I think it oozes Victoria Beckham, very modern and contemporary. Her collection is sleek, her style is clean, again very personal to her so it’s very distinctive. Definitely unlike any other designer shops.”
According to an assistant, the most popular items included a black-and-white tunic dress, priced at £2,250, a white shift dress with an ornate feathered hem (£2,100) and a white “micro twill” coat with a gold chain (£2,750), all from Beckham’s autumn/winter ready-to-wear collection. The “iconically Victoria” mirrored aviator sunglasses, exclusive to the shop, were also described as a bestseller.
In the VIP shopping section, on the lower ground floor, a single piece of artwork adorns the wall – a £600,000 Damien Hirst pink heart decorated with butterflies, the same piece that was reportedly bought for the Beckhams’ daughter Harper for her first birthday.
Ewelina Rutkowska, who has a shop opening in the parallel street next week, came to Beckham’s shop to check out her competition and said she was completely bowled over.
“It’s amazing – it doesn’t feel like a shop, it feels like an exhibition,” she said. “A completely different take on a boutique. The whole space is so open, very minimalistic, but with the wow factor. We came here specially to see the shop as I work in fashion and like her work and like her collection. But I didn’t expect it to be anything like this.”
Profit at Zara’s UK business fell by more than a third last year as the fashion chain slashed the dividend paid to its Spanish parent.
Pre-tax profits dropped by 34.5% to £33.9m in the year to the end of January as rising costs outstripped sales growth, annual accounts of the UK subsidiary showed. The annual dividend it paid to Inditex, the world’s biggest clothing retailer by sales, fell to £22m from £30m a year earlier.
Zara UK’s plan last year was to strengthen profitability by increasing sales, controlling costs and increasing margins, the accounts said.
Total sales rose 3.4% to £457.8m but the gross margin narrowed to 54.7% from 57.4% and the cost of goods for sale rose 10% to £207.6m. Sales and distribution expenses increased 7.2% as Zara refurbished three large stores in London and Manchester and about 10 smaller branches.
The retailer said there was no relationship between the fall in profit and the reduced dividend because the results were a snapshot. She said Zara was happy with how the UK business had performed since January.
Fashion retailers’ profit margins came under pressure last year amid heavy competition on the UK high street, particularly in the runup to Christmas. Chains such as Debenhams, French Connection and New Look cut prices as shoppers with weak spending power delayed purchases.
House of Fraser, the department store chain, said like-for-like sales in the six months to the end of July rose 4.2% with the pace of growth picking up each month in the second quarter. Menswear was its top performer, with sales up 9.7% in the first half.
Why does the Guardian’s Weekend magazine major on women’s fashion, with a men’s lineup only once in a blue moon? We need regular help too, you know.
Rob, Rob, Rob. My poor fashion-deprived chap. Look, I could spin you a line about how, ACK-SHU-ALL-EE, the magazine now features menswear once every four weeks, which is much more than once in a blue moon, and the Guardian covers the menswear shows, and we do menswear features, and, and, AND …
But you’re right, of course. Womenswear does get more coverage than menswear, in this paper and everywhere else. I wish I could tell you about the secret cabal of fashion gurus who conspire to make this happen, and the annual Bilderberg-style meetings that take place in a chic salon in Paris, where GQ’s Dylan Jones is ritually humiliated by Vogue’s Anna Wintour and Alexandra Shulman as he begs to be given more attention and they laugh in his face and spray his made-to-order Armani suit with Diet Coke (NO SUGAR!!!!!). But I’m afraid that, if I did, I’d be found strangled tomorrow with a Fendi cashmere scarf. So instead, I’ll give you the more prosaic answer.
You want to know why womenswear gets more attention than menswear? Because womenswear can be fabulous, gorgeous, weird, ridiculous, breathtaking, game-changing, enviable, exciting, desirable, wonderful. Menswear, on the other hand, can only be two things: weird or boring. And there’s only so much mileage you get from those two qualities.
It’s an impossible situation, really. Because men, by and large, are much more conservative about their dress than women and they have fewer garment options to boot; this means there is only so much menswear designers can do. Two options lie before them: don’t bother appealing to the mainstream and instead make three-legged trousers and boiler suits, or make boring but nice jumpers and suits. Womenswear can be like this, too – heaven knows there is weird womenswear and boring womenswear. But there is also beautiful, lovely womenswear, and men very rarely get that sweet spot of a middle ground. When they do, they practically implode with excitement, as happened when Hedi Slimane, then at Dior Menswear, managed to make the suit look so cool at the beginning of this century that the menswear magazines all collectively wet themselves (and their new skinny suits.) Since then, somewhat proving my point, Slimane found making even his suits boring and he has ditched menswear for womenswear and is now at Saint Laurent, making some of the coolest dresses and shoes around.
Men can have style – Jarvis Cocker and Charlie Watts have style – but it seems they can’t have fashion. What I mean is that men don’t have the fun of reading about changing trends, as women do, and playing dress-up, being a severe monochrome one day and then a fun 50s flirt the next. Changeability, I think, is seen as girlish, or something, which is ridiculous. And while it means men do save a lot of money by not trying out trends, it also means they miss out on a lot of fun.
But this isn’t just about the limitations of the industry, it is also about the limitations of the customers. We can’t blame menswear for being boring because boring, to be honest, is what most men want. Some menswear designers attempt to do more fun-but-not-weird clothes, such as Jonathan Saunders and Marc Jacobs. But the fact is, men don’t buy those clothes in the same way women do. Too many men, in my experience, have a grave fear of breaking out of their navy-T-shirt-with-jeans or button-down-shirt-with-dark-trousers rut, fear that they will look stupid. Laughable. Attention-seeking. Camp. Far better to stick with the uniform that renders one invisible than to risk something that makes you visible and might – might – result in you being mocked. Sometimes I marvel at what it must be like to be a man, so riddled with terror that swerving from the tested and oh-so-tired path will result in instant disaster. It is, really, the sartorial equivalent of obsessive dieting, when a person assumes that even a crumb of bread will lead to spontaneous fatness and therefore subsists purely on carrot sticks.
Anyway, the point of this is that men generally read fashion coverage less than women do, as you can see by comparing the circulation figures of men’s and women’s fashion magazines, which is why newspapers such as this one cover women’s fashion more. But the real problem is that we are all caught in a vicious circle when it comes to menswear: men tend to be conservative in their clothes – therefore menswear designers make conservative or, as rebellion, crazy clothes – therefore men don’t like to read about men’s fashion – therefore they stick with their conservative clothes.
There is only one solution here, Rob. You’re going to have to be the trailblazer that breaks this tired mould. Embrace changing trends! Wear fun menswear such as Jonathan Saunders! Encourage your male friends to talk about fashion! Overthrow the status quo! What I’m saying is, BE MENSWEAR’S GANDHI. Make the change! It’s a lot to put on one man’s shoulders, but I feel sure you can handle it. And, yes, you might think that buying a brightly coloured jumper might not make a difference, but remember: the journey to a million fashion-clued-up men begins with a tiny step. Or jumper.
Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
Julia Fowler and Geoff Watts are busy reminiscing about how they met racing cars and how a conversation at that racing club in their native Perth, Australia, got them to where they are today: a light and spacious studio in the basement of a Hatton Garden office.
Fowler, a fashion designer, was frustrated with the industry: she felt there was a shortfall of factual data and, too often, decision-making was based on “the way the wind was blowing, rather than any real hard solid metrics”, resulting in key commercial opportunities slipping by. Watts was working for a big dairy company at the time: “I said to Julia, ‘This is not how we do things in the dairy industry. We’ve got a lot of metrics … we know how much milk each cow is producing.’”
Using Fowler’s understanding of the fashion world and Watts’s experience as a developer, the couple co-founded Editd, a retail technology company that offers brands not just insights into how the industry is moving, but data to monitor and compare how they and their competitors are performing. If a competitor introduces a product from a brand you care about, an email pings straight into your inbox, says Watts. Stock movements are captured so that retailers have the information they need to “have the right product at the right price at the right time”.
Editd is used mostly by retail buyers, traders and merchandisers – clients include Gap, Asos, Gilt Groupe, Harvey Nichols and Debenhams. Earlier this year Asos, one of Editd’s first customers, attributed a 37% revenue increase in the last quarter of 2013 to its data insights, which helped structure Asos’s pricing competitively.
“I wanted to build a product like this because in my [former] job we would have information about our own products … but we never knew if we were missing out on an opportunity that we’d never tried,” Fowler explains. They moved to the UK in 2007, to London. “We felt that London had more a cutting-edge retail environment,” adds Watts. “If you think about all the value that has been created in fashion, I think London is the Silicon Valley of the world.”
Leaning over the laptop, they demonstrate in a few simple clicks the types of insights their customers glean from using the dashboard, which slices up the data that has been gathered using a combination of web crawlers and information provided by retailers. Adjust a few measures and you have a comparison of how much biker jackets are selling for by retailer, and how yours fares against the average price.
“If you look at retailers now,” says Fowler, “online or in-store they’re having new products delivered every week, almost every day, so the need for having better information about what you’re going to order is huge.”
Production and manufacturing processes have been a big contributor to the change in speedy decisions and fast turnarounds. “Some of our customers can now move from concept to in-store in three weeks,” Fowler says. Watts chips in: “Less than that [sometimes].”
Fowler also points to advances in technology and the uptake in digital as fuelling the need for an abundance of information in order to stay ahead of the market. She references brands that have used “buy-it-now” buttons during live streams of fashion shows and the proliferation of online-only stores. And, she says, “Trends will emerge from someone wearing something cool on Instagram; people will want to copy it [and] people need to bring a product to market instantly to address that demand.”
Editd’s co-founders are flying to the US next week, to begin recruiting staff for their new New York office. Earlier this year, Editd raised $4.4m from Index Ventures and Frog Capital, and their team of 28 is about to recruit four more people. As Watts says, laughing: “It’s getting a bit real.”
Jimmy Choo could soon be strutting its stuff in the City with the luxury shoe brand leading a queue of companies revving up plans to float in London now the economic uncertainty caused by the Scottish referendum is over.
The company, which makes shoes that are a red-carpet staple of Hollywood actresses such as Sandra Bullock and Cate Blanchett, is deciding whether to proceed with a stock exchange listing that is expected to value it at more than £700m. Like other float contenders such as the RAC, the motoring services group, and Aldermore, the bank, its board and advisers were keen to see the outcome of the independence poll before committing to a listing in potentially volatile financial markets.
Scottish housebuilder Miller is also on the list of companies that could come out of the traps after last week's vote in favour of the union that shored up both the FTSE 100 and the pound.
The RAC, owned by private equity firm Carlyle, has been biding its time with management keen for the dust to settle on the referendum and to see the latest figures from rival AA – which reports its half-year figures on Tuesday. The AA, which floated in June, priced its shares at 250p and, unlike other debutantes such as Saga and AO world whose shares have sunk below their offer price, closed last week at 291.5p. Although low-cost airline Wizz Air and fashion retailer Fat Face pulled their flotations after several new issues met little enthusiasm from investors, London is still heading for a record year with 30 companies having joined the market. Some analysts think a listing could value the RAC at up to £2bn.
Aldermore, which does not have a branch network, was set up in 2009 to take on the big four – Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland. It is owned by private equity firm AnaCap which is said to be considering offering half the shares to new investors, potentially valuing the bank at £800m-£900m.
If Jimmy Choo does list, it will add a third luxury name to London's market, joining Burberry and Mulberry. Founded by the eponymous Hackney cobbler with former It girl Tamara Mellon, the company was snapped up by JAB, the investment vehicle of Germany's billionaire Reimann family, for more than £500m in 2011. Neither Mellon nor Choo are still involved although Choo's wife's niece, Sandra Choi (pictured), is the brand's creative director. The offering is likely to involve a 25% stake sale, potentially raising close to £200m.
Eight leading fashion retailers have said they are prepared to pay more for clothes made in Cambodia, days after thousands of workers took to the streets of Phnom Penh to call for the minimum wage there to be nearly doubled to $177 (£110) a month.
The brands, which include one of Cambodia's biggest buyers, H&M, as well as Inditex, owner of Zara, and Britain's Primark, have written to the Cambodian deputy prime minister and the chairman of the local Garment Manufacturers Association to say they were "ready to factor higher wages" into their pricing.
It follows a day of action in and around the Cambodian capital on Wednesday involving thousands of clothing workers wearing orange T-shirts demonstrating outside factories in their lunch hour. Workers are demanding a significant rise in the minimum wage from the current £62 a month. At one point the army were called out to confront protesters.
The big-name companies, which have been joined by Next, New Look, C&A and N Brown Group, a home-shopping firm, said in the letter that they wanted to see "more cooperation with trade unions in the workplace".
The letter states: "Our purchasing practices will enable the payment of a fair living wage and increased wages will be reflected in our prices, taking also into account productivity and efficiency gains and the development of the skills of workers, carried out in cooperation with unions at workplace level."
Jyrki Raina, general secretary of IndustriALL Global Union, the union federation that has coordinated the action, welcomed the "'unparalleled" letter.
He said: "The brands state their willingness to incorporate higher wages by paying more for garments. Factory owners have no excuse not to pay their workers more.
"What's more, the Cambodian government should raise the minimum wage significantly. The letter also shows the brands recognise that unions are key to securing better worker rights, a fair living wage and a stable market."
The plight of clothing factory workers was pushed centre stage in April last year when 1,130 were killed and many more injured in the collapse of the Rana Plaza factory building in the Bangladeshi capital, Dhaka.
Retailers stood accused of hiding behind middlemen to get clothes made for the cheapest price with little regard for workers' pay and conditions. Workers in many developing countries are paid less than £3 a day to produce cheap clothes for retail chains in the west.
The growth of the Cambodian clothing manufacturing sector has become a vital but troublesome issue for the government. It has been a boon for the fledgling economy, providing as many as half a million jobs and generating £3bn annually, but frequent protests by increasingly assertive unions have tested the government's patience.
Ath Thorn, president of the Cambodian clothing workers union, welcomed the letter but called on the brands to take real action and negotiate directly with workers.
"We know from past experience that just a letter isn't strong enough – the brands must take additional action immediately to ensure a higher wage for Cambodian workers.
"To achieve long-term stability and decent wages, we need the ones who make the biggest profits to be accountable."
In the midst of austerity, when the local government sector is braced for yet more funding cuts, English devolution is a recipe for beggar-thy-neighbour tax cuts to woo big business. The likely quid pro quo for increased Scottish autonomy carries a gloomy prognosis, despite the hope that a degree of self-determination for the UK's constituent parts could provide a psychological and economic boost.
Optimists would say there are models of federalism that allow for a degree of regional control without a race to the bottom on tax and spending. But since an independent Scottish nation, the one Alex Salmond proposed, was already primed to cut corporation tax by 3p in the pound, such a race is not such a fanciful prediction.
Let's take the current projections for spending by local government. An 11.3% cut in this financial year is scheduled to be followed by a 14.5% cut in 2015-16. These cuts follow George Osborne's knife-wielding first four years, which have seen more than 20% wiped off council budgets.
Birmingham City Council leader Albert Bore said last week his local authority faces a "ticking timebomb" should these cuts be implemented. This amounts to £800m, or 60% of its controllable budget by 2018, kickstarted by a £200m drop next year alone. Bore expects to shed 6,000 jobs on top of the 7,000 lost since the start of the decade. The same story is being repeated across England.
In Whitehall, some budgets have enjoyed a degree of protection. Public investment spending is not one of them. This was deemed a dicretionary budget line after the crisis and suffered a 50% reduction. As most investment spending was expected in the regions, it proved a double whammy.
Localism was supposed to be the antidote to spending cuts, allowing councils to be more entrepreneurial and collaborate. In effect, the Localism Act, allied to Local Enterprise Partnerships (Leps) and a deregulation of planning, acted alongside the cuts as a highly political nudge, pushing councils away from providing services to facilitating business investment.
A way round the problem could be a devolution that brings with it tax-raising powers – in particular the ability to raise bonds to pay for specific infrastructure projects like new housing.
The new combined authorities covering areas around Manchester, Leeds, Sheffield, Liverpool and Newcastle are keen to sell bonds on the money markets. But they want jobs more than anything, and not just infrastructure jobs. They want private businesses in their area to develop and to grow.
Unfortunately, EU state aid rules prevent them from making any business-related investments or subsidies. In particular, the rules ban spending on a bigger, faster digital infrastructure in the big cities when private investment is available. Without the ability to attract business with targeted aid, only broad tax cuts are left.
Under the current devolution rules, the Scots expect to gain powers to vary income tax by 10p in the pound, up from 3p currently. The landfill tax will transfer to Holyrood, along with the land and buildings transactions tax (equivalent to stamp duty) under the remit of the new Revenue Scotland.
Will English regions gain these sorts of powers? And what if devo max includes some control of corporation tax, national insurance, VAT, capital gains tax or air passenger duty? Following the Irish example, which Salmond was keen to do, regional politicians with the right to vary tax will offer huge tax inducements to win a factory or warehouse, creating a deep financial hole with the promise of taxpaying jobs in the future to bail them out. It is the same on the global stage, where countries outbid each other for the investment of multinationals.
So whatever structure of regional government can be agreed in the wake of the referendum in Scotland (and there is no reason to be optimistic that an agreement is possible), the freedom on offer is one that provides councils with little more than the tools to undercut their neighbours.
Lock-up agreements on share sales invoke images of handcuffs: once a shareholder has agreed not to sell for a specified period, it ought to be impossible to be released from the commitment. That's easy to understand, and usually a virtue in matters of stock market integrity. In practice, life is not so simple.
Elliott Advisors is the hedge fund that has enjoyed a spectacular run by buying Game Digital's predecessor from administrators two years ago, resuscitating the computer games retailer and floating it in June.
Elliott retained a 60% stake and signed a 180-day lock-up. Just over 90 days later, though, Elliott flogged another 13% of the shares last week. How come? "All lock-up arrangements are subject to certain customary exceptions," said Game Digital's prospectus.
Ah, yes, those customary agreements. The custom is that lock-ups can be broken if the company's bookrunner approves. On this occasion, Liberum had plausible reasons for giving the nod: a little more liquidity in the stock might be useful as Game Digital enters the FTSE All-Share index this week. The share price has climbed from 200p at float and the new shareholders were willing to pay 260p, so few other shareholders will feel sore. And the buyers included the fund managed by the lauded Neil Woodford – everybody likes to have him on the register.
By way of nuance, Liberum's statement explained that it had only agreed to waive the "soft" lock-up restrictions. "Hard" lock-ups are those that can't be broken under any circumstances; soft ones are the flexible variety. But this is a nuance too far. Common sense says a non-binding lock-up is a contradiction. Applying the label "soft" and "hard" just causes confusion.
There's a lot of it about. Mike Ashley at Sports Direct has twice sold in lock-up periods. Lloyds did so with its St James's Place stake. Now there's Elliott at Game Digital. All parties obeyed the rules: but the rules themselves are nonsense. A lock-up should do what it says: otherwise what's the point?
Tough times for Asos, the online fashion business that for years was a stock-market favourite. Its shares – up from 60p to £71 over the last decade – have taken a very nasty tumble since March after three profits warnings, the most recent only last week. The shares are now just £20.65. All sorts has gone wrong, from a warehouse fire to stronger sterling, which has hit exports. It also needs to invest more in China (which worries investors because far bigger beasts – Tesco, B&Q – have lost money there).
Asos has other problems too, because it is no longer unique in the online fashion business. There's perky little rival boohoo.com, which listed in March. It had a tricky start, but the shares are up 45% to 54p since July. But far more threatening is Germany's giant Zalando – coming to the Frankfurt market next month with an expected value of €5bn.
The warm autumn weather is threatening to wreak havoc on the high street with fashion retailers complaining of dire sales as Britons put off buying winter jackets and jumpers.
With some parts of the country enjoying temperatures of 26C this week it was still shorts-and-sandals weather at a time when stores are packed with heavy winter coats and cashmere jumpers. Such is the mismatch between the climate and clothing on sale that John Lewis revealed yesterday that takings in its fashion departments had tumbled more than 13% on last year's levels.
The difficult trading conditions are reinforced by data from business advisory firm BDO. According to its fashion sales tracker, which monitors the performance of 40 clothing chains including Oasis, Karen Millen and White Stuff, like-for-like fashion store sales dropped 11.5% in the week to last Sunday. Some retailers including House of Fraser, M&S, Hobbs and Banana Republic are already running selective promotions in a bid to persuade shoppers to buy.
"With children now back at school thoughts would usually turn to winter essentials, however the unseasonably warmer days are delaying these purchases," said John Lewis buying director, Johnathan Marsh. Shopper numbers were also down on the previous year, he said.
According to the Met Office the UK has so far enjoyed the driest September in over 50 years. "The first half of September has been exceptionally dry across much of the UK and temperatures for many areas have also been well above average," said the Met Office's Dan Williams. The warm spell continued this week with the temperature topping 26C in Wigginholt, West Sussex on Thursday, making it the hottest place in the country.
John Lewis's sister chain Waitrose said sales of ice-creams had jumped 25% in the same week with barbecue and picnic foods also in unusually high demand.
The unpredictable British weather is one of the biggest challenges faced by the country's fashion chains but the stakes are highest at this time of year as heavy-duty winter clothing brings higher profit margins. "A warm September never helps, but I'm not in the weather business I'm in the fashion business," said Stephen Marks, chief executive and founder of French Connection. "We featured a blue coat in our advertising and it absolutely flew out of the stores when the weather was hot. You've got to have the right things."
Espirito Santo analyst Tony Shiret said that store chiefs were probably ahead of their sales targets at the start of this month as the disappointing August weather initially boosted sales of their new collections. "They were probably a little bit ahead coming into September and now will be net down," he said. "August is a much smaller [sales] month because it doesn't have the marketing behind it."
Sophie Bevan, head of retail at BDO, said retailers were in relatively good shape because summer collections had sold well. "This time last year there were more promotions of summer end-of-stock lines and more appropriate weather for the products in store."
The poor fashion sales blunted John Lewis's overall performance with sales down 3.5% in the week to last Saturday. There were bright spots, with the retailer reporting a 4% increase in sales of men's accessories – buoyed by demand for Calvin Klein underwear – and a 3.6% uplift in its electricals departments, where tablets and Apple products were in demand.
Home furnishings also did well, with sales of carpets and curtains up 11%. "Although customers are not planning for the cold winter nights just yet, they are still looking to treat themselves to a little something new," said Marsh.
Retailers will only be in real trouble if a warm September turns into an Indian summer, which the Met Office defines as "a warm, calm spell of weather occurring in autumn, especially in October and November".
"Retail is a flow business," Shiret added. "They've got product coming in in the next few weeks because of the planned phasing of new stock and it starts backing up unless you clear it. I think everyone will be hoping this weather stops soon."
The first trend to emerge on the opening day of Milan fashion week was being anti-trend. At least that was the contrary message from the Gucci catwalk as the brand cited "dressing to please herself" and a "defiance to seasonal conventions" as part of the mission statement for its customer next summer.
This was a show that put wardrobe favourites before experimental pieces. To wit, the item that appeared most frequently on the catwalk was a pair of cropped-to-the-calf, faded wide-leg jeans featuring chunky gold nautical buttons. Worn with a silk neckscarf, a delicate striped knit, a soft suede shoulder bag with a chunky canvas strap and a low ponytail, the look was simple, sophisticated and luxurious.
The vintage, nautical mood continued with A-line suede skirts that featured gold sailor buttons and were identifiably Gucci. Suede trench dresses that fell just above the knee were nipped in at the waist, while jackets were boxy and in step with the denim jackets that appeared on the London catwalks earlier in the week.
The result felt right in the current fashion climate, which riffs on that most novel of ideas – dressing for real life. Less successful, though, was the evening wear. Embroidered with lace-up details, chiffon and fur vests, it was an altogether fussier proposition.
The creative director, Frida Giannini, who is about to celebrate her 10th anniversary as artistic boss at the brand, took her bow in the aforementioned cropped jeans and embroidered blouse. By now Giannini has worked out what Gucci should mean within the luxury fashion context. Putting sophistication and elegance, rather than cutting-edge trends, on the agenda, is clearly the formula that she and her bosses think will secure the brand's future amid fierce competition.
More evidence of strategic brand-building came with the launch of Gucci Cosmetics, which was debuted on Wednesday's catwalk, albeit in a low-key way with models looking simple rather than "done". To highlight the launch, the face of Gucci Cosmetics (and granddaughter of Grace Kelly) Charlotte Casiraghi sat alongside Kate Moss in the front row. The brand's focus on make-up is considered. For most, a suede trench dress with a four-figure price tag will be out of reach, but a lipstick – particularly one that comes with the glamorous backstory of Gucci – is both appealing and affordable. The timing of the launch makes tactical sense, as the brand experiences considerable financial pressure. The most recent reports testify to a slowdown in Gucci's performance, with sales falling by 2.1%. Analysts have suggested that China has fallen out of love with logos and mega brands and that the wider trend is towards newer niche brands.
But the fashion overlords at Kering, parent company of Gucci, are not about to stand by and let this historic luxury house – and one that accounts for more than half of the conglomerate's market value – decline. One course of action to support its flagship label has been to raise prices and tighten distribution to elevate its appeal. This latest beauty launch seeks to underpin that but from the opposite – more mass market – approach.
Topshop based its Unique collection at London fashion week (LFW) on Sunday on classic British subcultures – mods, rockers, bright young things and Northern Soul revellers.
But forget retro. With a sharp-edged commercial spirit always at the heart of the high street's biggest presence at London Fashion Week, the references were only vague. The priority here is appealing to young women in 2014 – not channelling the ones of yesteryear. Model Cara Delevingne opened and closed the show, an embodiment of the here and now if ever there was one.
She was followed by other Brit models of the moment – Jourdan Dunn, Hollie-May Saker, Sam Rollinson and Lily Donaldson. This cast of characters was augmented by the front row: Pixie Geldof, Daisy Lowe, Ellie Goulding, Laura Bailey, Laura Carmichael and Alexa Chung surrounded Topshop's chief executive, Sir Philip Green. In short, the space in King's Cross contained a fair few of the celebrities regularly named as modern trendsetters – in place to appeal to the Topshop demographic of teenage and twentysomething shoppers.
The collection consisted of clothes that any of the young women in the front row, or those browsing instore, could wearstraight from the catwalk. There were satin party dresses with a hint of twenties in loose shapes and sorbet colours, boxy car coats and flippy knitted dresses that owed something to a mod polo shirt, while the sportswear now a staple of the modern wardrobe was in primary colours. Rocker style was represented in high-waisted tight black trousers worn with scarlet nipped-in jackets, and off-the-shoulder frilled blouses. Silver pleated skirts had the movement for a Northern soul dancefloor, but would equally appeal to a customer without an in-depth knowledge of dusty vinyl.
Topshop is smart enough to know that digital is the best way to reach its consumer and this show came armour-clad with online tie-ins. The company dubbed the event "the social catwalk" and has collaborated with Facebook to bring the show to its millions of followers. Flipping the usual insider exclusivity of a fashion show, those not on the guest list are the ones who get the perks.
The Topshop Facebook page will sell pieces from the collection not seen on the catwalk, and Oxford Circus flagship store was due to have six pieces from the collection available straight after the show.
"I believe that enabling Topshop's fans to view key looks from the collection before our industry insiders is a real revolution – and one that we are proud to pioneer," said Green.
If Topshop has been one of the early adopters of digital routes to market, fashion has more generally been resistant. But it looks as if this season, certainly at London Fashion Week, there has been a shift. This is evident right down to where it matters, in the front row, where fashion editors have been spotted wearing Google Glass. The opening event this season featured a speech by Google director Peter Fitzgerald, streamed from his office in California. Perhaps the impact of alpha e-tailer Natalie Massenet as chair of the British Fashion Council is beginning to show. It is certainly there in statistics: a year ago, 33% of LFW designers had e-commerce websites. That figure is now 43%.
Other highlights of Sunday included Richard Nicoll's show based on an interesting alliance of Disney's Tinkerbell and gymwear, and a presentation from Mulberry. Still without a creative director, the Somerset brand amped up the Englishness. The collection, made by the design team, was based on the trellises and cornflowers of a country garden.
Guitar music might have had it tough recently in other parts of the world, but in California the band scene is thriving. Its nerve centres are located across the state, in house parties, underage venues such as the Smell in downtown LA and at Burger Records in Fullerton, near Disneyland. Burger is at once a record shop, gig venue, hangout and the headquarters of an extraordinarily prolific, high-quality record label. The music is a joyous mix of surf, punk and psychedelic rock. It’s a scene that has almost entirely escaped the attention of the mainstream.
One of the few people to document it extensively is the creative director of Saint Laurent, designer Hedi Slimane. The photographer and indie-rock obsessive moved from Paris to LA in 2007 and immersed himself in the local underground. Though many fashion houses court pop stars, few have developed such long-standing and reciprocal relationships with rock musicians as Slimane. For more than a decade, in magazines, exhibitions and books, such as 2005’s London: Birth of a Cult (a photographic record of the rise of Pete Doherty), he has shot bands ranging from megastars to the completely obscure, but all united in their charisma, creativity and appetite for chaos. He has captured the elements of nascent rock scenes in New York, London and California: the sweaty fans, spilt drinks and crumbling venues. This fascination with music’s wild side has been catalogued in a new exhibition – Sonic – which opens next week at Paris’s Fondation Pierre Bergé-Yves Saint Laurent.
This love of rock ’n’ roll has had an impact on Slimane’s parallel career as a designer. As well as sending his spin on grunge, punk and rockabilly down the Saint Laurent catwalk, Slimane shoots all the label’s advertising campaigns and unveiled Saint Laurent’s new beginning under his direction with images of Christopher Owens, a classic rock lost boy with a back catalogue of wracked, emotional songs and an action-packed past.
Slimane has also worked with the Garden, twins Wyatt and Fletcher Shears, who have rock in their DNA – their father was in Orange County punk bands like Final Conflict and Shattered Faith. They starred in a menswear campaign and have stalked Slimane’s catwalk.
Slimane has commissioned California bands to write 15-minute pieces to soundtrack his shows: the Mystic Braves did the honours for the recent psych rock-inspired collection. There is a Saint Laurent Music Project, where musicians from Marilyn Manson to BB King are shot by Slimane in their favourite clothes from the collections, styled by themselves. There are collaborations with young musicians, such as Grimes and Seth Bogart from Hunx and his Punx, who co-design T-shirts, shirts, bags and shoes. Young band members sit crosslegged at the feet of editors and buyers in the front row at Saint Laurent shows, cheering on their friends and peers.
Sonic shuffles the pack of rock history and traces an alternative lineage from the 50s to now, taking in Elvis’s front room, Kurt Cobain’s monkey toys and Jerry Lee Lewis’s ranch, and capturing guitar music’s latest mutation: the new wave of psych rockers who are reinventing the acid-drenched template of late-60s pop. There’s an imperious portrait of James Edward Bagshaw, singer with Kettering psychedelicists Temples, and thrilling live shots of Froth, Tame Impala and the Mystic Braves. The show juxtaposes images of young musicians like indie soul man Curtis Harding and woozy chanteuse Clementine Creevy of Cherry Glazerr with more formal portraits of music legends including David Byrne, Keith Richards, Chuck Berry and, in his last sitting, Lou Reed. It’s vivid and extremely personal.
Capturing musicians moshing, performing and just hanging out in their bedroom, Sonic is an expression of Slimane’s love of rock ’n’ roll at its most visceral, teenage and raw. It captures young fans in that golden period when the band they love is still a secret to the wider world, and a concert is a shared celebration between performers and audience. “That’s just rock’n’roll – forever teenage,” says Burger Records co-founder Lee Rickard. “There will always be disenfranchised youths trying to find their friends, trying to find their place.” Slimane’s images capture those youths on the perpetual quest for teenage kicks.
Sonic opens on 18 September at Fondation Pierre Bergé-Yves Saint Laurent. For details, go to fondation-pb-ysl.net
Jack Ma must really like America. The story goes that Ma fixed on the name of his soon-to-be-floated Chinese e-commerce business – dubbed China's Amazon and eBay combined – while sitting in a San Francisco cafe. He was considering calling it Alibaba and asked a waitress what the word meant to her. When she said "open sesame", the idea of a door to a treasure trove seemed to fit his grand ambitions.
Now those ambitions are being fulfilled as Alibaba becomes the largest-ever listing on the New York Stock Exchange. Fifteen years after the fledgling business failed to rustle up $2m from Silicon Valley, Alibaba will be raising $21bn or more and will be valued at around $160bn, with dealings due to start next Friday.
But it is not all plain sailing. Alibaba reported second-quarter earnings of $2bn, up 46% on a year ago, although growth in active users showed signs of slowing. China's e-commerce market is expected to continue booming, with less than half the population online, but Alibaba faces growing competition from the likes of Baidu and Tencent. And investors may be wary of possible problems with Chinese censorship and regulations, as well as the control exercised over the company by Ma and his senior managers. There has already been controversy over the 2011 sale of Alibaba's payment business, Alipay, to a company controlled by Ma.
Amid all the razzmatazz of Apple's latest launch – including a live performance from U2, and iTunes account holders receiving the band's new album whether they wanted it or not – it is easy to forget that the success of the iPhone 6 and Watch is crucial for its chief executive, Tim Cook, and highly paid retail guru, Angela Ahrendts.
It is also important for chip designer Imagination Technologies, a key supplier to Apple, which issues its latest trading update on Wednesday. The company has had a volatile time, with worries about weak licensing and falling royalty rates. A statement in June showed it beating expectations amid growth in new deals for smartphones and other products, but analysts still expect a dip in profits this year from £23.7m to around £22m.
Imagination Technologies will drop out of the FTSE 250 at the market close on Friday after recent share price weakness, particularly since June's sale of a 9.3% stake for £52m by Intel.
So investors will be keen to hear about the company's progress, especially for its newly launched 64-bit central processing unit, as well as its thoughts on Apple's future sales.
With London fashion week now well under way, online retailer Asos is hoping to come back into style with investors.
Once a stock market darling, the company issued two profit warnings in six months, prompting fears that its stellar growth had peaked. Shortly after the second one, in June, it suffered a warehouse fire in Barnsley, which damaged around 20% of its stock and prompted it briefly to stop taking orders.
Its shares have lost 60% of their value since the start of the year, despite a recent upwards blip on vague talk of a US takeover bid, and continue to be under pressure amid concerns of further bad news to come.
So investors will be looking for reassurance from Tuesday's update, especially about currency effects relating to its overseas sites. The recent strength of the pound had forced it to offer steep discounts in markets such as Russia, one of the reasons for the June warning.
News on Asos's soon-to-be-launched Chinese site is also being keenly awaited. As for any takeover, that would partly depend on 27% shareholder Bestseller, a Danish fashion group that is variously said to be keen to sell, or alternatively keen to snap up the rest of the group.
Theme parks like Legoland, lose a lot of their attraction when it's wet, so operator Merlin Enterprises must have been blessing the weather gods fro the sunny summer.
On Thursday, Merlin will unveil an update for the crucial third-quarter period, its peak trading season, with analysts expecting like-for-like sales growth of about 2.4%. This would be lower than the 8.1% seen in the first half of the year, after a surge of visitors on the back of The Lego Movie, but is still a reasonable performance.
The company – which is also behind Madame Tussauds – is likely to give the City an update on expansion plans. It currently has about 60% of sales in the UK and Europe, and is moving into the US, South Korea and China. Legolands are also scheduled to open in Dubai in 2016 and Japan in 2017.
But its share may see some weakness since the private equity lock-up period following last year's flotation is due to expire the day before the update.
Marks & Spencer is losing its share of the clothing market at the fastest pace in more than three years as it tries to cut back on promotions.
Analysts at Bernstein Research have trimmed their profit forecasts for the retailer by 1.6% as they said the latest market share data from Kantar indicated M&S was failing to capitalise on the general upswing in clothing sales enjoyed by retailers over the warm summer.
The retailer's clothing sales slipped 0.4% in the six months to 3 August according to Kantar, taking its share of the market down to 10.4%, 0.5% percentage points less than a year before. Analyst Jamie Merriman said the figures indicated that M&S lost out to rivals in the three months to 3 August at more than twice the rate seen in the previous quarter.
M&S has been trying to tempt back shoppers with new designs created by a crack womenswear clothing team, led by former M&S food boss John Dixon and former Jaeger boss Belinda Earl, who took charge last year.
But the retailer has also been making efforts to cut back on promotions, and Merriman said its relatively higher prices could have pushed shoppers elsewhere.
"The product improvements M&S has been talking about don't seem to have made a lasting impression with customers yet. There is not an overwhelming sense of change and if perception has not changed but prices are going up then it's possible to lose customers," said Merriman.
She trimmed her full year profit forecast for M&S by 1.5% to £603m.
M&S declined to comment, but the retailer did not deliver the bulk of its latest ranges for the autumn/winter season until the beginning of this month. It is not due to update the City on its trading until 5 November when it will reveal the results for the first half of its financial year.
It’s that time of the year again – the models are in town, the fashion editors are being prepped and the phone is ringing off the hook in the designers’ press offices. From the distance covered by the VIP fashion week cars to designers and models by headcount, here is the event in numbers.
There are 82 designers showing on the London fashion week schedule. The first designer to show? That was J JS Lee at 10am on Friday at the British Fashion Council courtyard show space at Somerset House. Another 170 UK and international emerging and established, ready-to-wear and accessory designers will be taking part in the designer showrooms, where collections will be exhibited to press and buyers during the week.
During LFW, a total of 58 catwalk shows will take place at venues across London. With an average duration of 10 minutes, that means watching the shows back to back would take nine hours 40 minutes. With that in mind, we’d hate to think how many hours in total are spent waiting in traffic between shows. 
On Friday morning, LFW was officially opened with a petit déjeuner and speeches from the BFC chairman Natalie Massenet and Peter Fitzgerald, the BFC digital pillar president and Google director, while press and guests sipped tea from beautiful Wedgewood cups and saucers.
If you’re anywhere near the Strand this week, you’ll be sure to see some long-limbed beauties flash past en route to their next show. Premier model management alone have confirmed that they will be flying in 57 models for fashion week.
Each London fashion week, 200kg of coffee beans and 30,000 espressos are served by sponsor Lavazza. That’s a lot of caffeine.
More than 5,000 visitors are expected: that includes buyers, TV and radio crews, journalists and photographers from countries across the world.
At the opening of LFW last year, it was announced that the direct value of the UK fashion industry is worth £26bn to the UK economy, up from £21bn in 2009. It is estimated that orders worth more than £100m are placed during LFW each season.
According to the BFC, its international guest programme – aimed at strengthening global business for British designers and international attendance at LFW – generates more than £65m of orders during fashion week.
If you go down to the shows today, you’ll see a big love affair with popcorn occurring. More than 5,300 bags of Propercorn are munched at LFW, according to the BFC press office.
Nothing but the best for the fashionistas – over the five-day period, 80 Penhaligon’s candles will be burned. Ranging in price from £32-95, these candles don’t come cheap, but even the cheapest will provide you with 30 hours worth of burning time … or 100 days’ worth of light if you burned each of the candles straight after the other.
Mercedes-Benz chauffeurs, one of LFW’s sponsors, will cover 32,000 miles ferrying VIPs between shows. That’s more than the distance of six return flights from London to Beijing.
Increasingly, LFW and its attendees are embracing technology and upping their digital offerings. Twitter is a handy way for guests to stay up to date with any late-running shows and to share straight from the front row. The BFC found that 78% of guests looking to attend LFW said that they planned to tweet during the event. At the AW14 show in February, there were more than 300,000 mentions of #LFW on Twitter over the five days, and nearly 100,000 images tagged with #LFW on Instagram.
One of the most popular events at fashion week (and the best place to glimpse Kate Moss), the Topshop Unique show on Sunday is a hot ticket. More than 5,300 ticket requests have been sent to the Topshop press team so far but, unfortunately, there is not enough space to go round. The capacity for the show is 861 people.
This is how next summer will look, according to Donna Karan, a designer as closely associated with New York City as the Empire State building. Though the collection was typically sleek, flattering and expensive-looking, it did throw a curveball in the shape of those possibly Pharrell-influenced hats, which we would love to see modelled by the great and the good of Madison Avenue’s boardrooms
Tommy Hilfiger’s $6.4bn business is built not on his skill with hemlines or colour palettes, but on his gift for seeing the big picture. Tommy Hilfiger clothes sell because they make the customer feel connected to the gloss and glamour of pop culture, and to an aspirational lifestyle. And right now there is no more aspirational summer lifestyle than to hang out at a music festivals, looking cool.
So on the catwalk at New York fashion week on Monday, that was exactly what the models wearing Tommy Hilfiger’s collection for next summer were doing.
The scene for the show was a music festival in the late 1960s, the time when 63-year-old Hilfiger launched his first fashion label. The Hilfiger name was spelled out in lurid floral arrangements borrowed from the Sgt Pepper album cover, while Jimi Hendrix’s Crosstown Traffic opened the show. The theme extended even to the casting: first onto the catwalk was Georgia May Jagger, the model daughter of Mick.
The collection “blends our Americana heritage with vintage rock style, updated for the modern festival muse”, said the designer after the show.
The Tommy Hilfiger label does not deal in nuance. The literal-mindedness of the clothes on the catwalk – drummer boy jackets, flares, lurex scarves, tunics, peaked caps and guitars – became tiresome. But for a brand this size, a catwalk collection is a chance to flash one strong, simple image into the public consciousness. And there were smart modern touches within the retro mood: flat-collared bomber jackets, a style seen at Louis Vuitton on last season’s catwalks and gathering momentum this season, were shown alongside shorts and ankle boots which referenced the leggy style of the Coachella-to-Glastonbury with-the-band fashionistas.
The business model of selling fashion by association with celebrity and lifestyle is now so standard within the fashion industry that it is easy to forget Hilfiger was a pioneer. When, in the 1990s, he began forging relationships and making deals with pop stars and rappers, eyebrows were raised amongst the socialites and Hollywood-stamped starlets who then populated the front rows. Twenty years later, the hook-ups which Hilfiger initiated are the bread and butter of even the most pedigreed brands. Rihanna is the biggest front-row draw on the global catwalk circuit, wooed by designers from Chanel to Versace.
These days Hilfiger’s company – along with Calvin Klein’s – is wholly owned by the fashion powerhouse PVH. Hilfiger is still very much involved, with the title of Principal Designer and Visionary. In the most recently released set of financial results, Tommy Hilfiger profits were up 9%. (By way of comparison, stablemate Calvin Klein posted a 1% increase.)
If the front-of-house theme of this show was the music festival, the behind-the-scenes strategy was all about keeping the Tommy Hilfiger brand ahead of the curve as fashion’s digital age gets under way. Every aspect of social media connected to this show was worked up and framed not simply to broaden the reach of the pictures from the catwalk, but enhance the global audience’s appreciation of Tommy Hilfiger as a lifestyle brand. The day of the show saw a ‘takeover’ of the brand’s Instagram account by Alexa Chung, social media star and “music festival muse” of the moment.
The conundrum facing New York fashion week is this: the pop cultural noise and fanfare around fashion is louder than it has ever been, but everyone – from the consumer to the editors-in-chief – is bored with traditional catwalk shows. The clothes on the catwalk have become overshadowed by the circus of celebrity, models, gossip and street tyle that wraps around them. The actual show has become the excuse for the party, rather than the party itself. What to do?
Humberto Leon and Carol Lim, duo behind the cult label Opening Ceremony, had an idea: how about asking Spike Jonze and Jonah Hill to reboot the catwalk show by scripting a one-night-only, one-act play about a catwalk show, in which the new collection serves as theatrical costume in a story about the human dramas of fashion week?
Wacky idea but it might just work. And it did. 100% Lost Cotton, performed using the Metropolitan Opera House as the stage, the audience watching from bleachers backstage, was a story set during the castings and fittings for an imaginary Opening Ceremony catwalk show, with a story playing out between designers, stylists, models and journalists. Actor Elle Fanning played Julie, a 16-year-old model newly arrived from Oklahoma; Catherine Keener played a fictionalised, monstered version of Carol Lim.
This was a satire of the fashion industry in which its superficiality, absurdity, addiction problems, and shoddy treatment of young women were all skewered with black humour. “Her legs are making that skirt look horrible,” said the fictional Leon about a model wearing his clothes. “What’s wrong with your legs? Are these your normal legs?” The supermodel Karlie Kloss made a cameo, only for another woman to bitch that she was “in her late early 20s”.
No matter how funny – or accurate – the play would have been a failure, from a fashion week point of view, if the clothes had gone unnoticed. A theme of innocence wove through the evening, drawing together the clothes and the play. This was a nostalgic collection inspired, said Leon and Lim, by their suburban teenage life in the very early 1990s. An announcement was made before the performance prohibiting the use of phones or cameras, citing a New York City law: a bold move in an age where being shared on social media is all-important, but one which restored a sense of occasion which fashion week sometimes seems to have lost, and imbued the evening with nostalgia. The shape and curve of hems were inspired by primitive computer code, the colours inspired by suburban pools and gardens. Julie, the heroine of the play, represented the ideas which the clothes also try to capture. The dovetailing of script and fashion was an ambitious idea – if it only half-worked, it should get credit for that.
It was perhaps slightly bad luck that Anthony Vaccarello’s debut collection for Versus, the secondary Versace line, immediately followed Opening Ceremony on the fashion-week schedule. The house of Versace takes the business of being sexy and slender and wearing almost nothing very seriously indeed – the very attitude that had just been sent up, to great effect, six blocks away. Nonetheless, Donatella will surely be thrilled with this collection, with which Vaccarello, who has already made his name in the industry with startlingly revealing dresses, riffed on the house symbols like a man to the Versace manor born. Greek keys, lion heads, black leather, gold hardware – and bare skin – made for a recognisably Versus, highly commercial collection. Vaccarello, no doubt, has his eyes on the prize: the two designers who preceded him at Versus, Brits Christopher Kane and J W Anderson, have gone on to lucrative deals with international luxury giants Kering and LVMH.
Having successfully infiltrated the fashion world, Victoria Beckham now occupies a very different position within the New York fashion week web of power and influence than she did in the days when she was marketing her own glamorous lifestyle in the form of figure-flattering date dresses.
Her brand now operates in the space between the avant-garde designers whose challenging ideas provide fashion's momentum and the commercial meat of selling those trends at mass level.
This is a sweet spot to be in. The hardcore innovators will always be misunderstood and have fun poked at them, being too far ahead of the public in their thinking; at the other extreme, mass retail is all merciless competition and no glamour.
Victoria Beckham is proving to be a dab hand at navigating the space in between, taking silhouettes and styles that are just beginning to come into fashion industry focus and distilling them into slick, glossy collections that make new ideas appealing and palatable. (Of course, having David Beckham in the front row doesn't hurt.)
Her latest collection, for spring/summer 2015, began with a series of three taupe linen dresses and coat-dresses, each falling to just below the knee, each with a wrapover or double breasted fastening, each worn with a half-belt, which narrowed the silhouette while keeping the line soft and fluid.
The midi skirt, the double-breasted jacket or coat, the lean-but-loose silhouette are all looks which were floating around the fashion zeitgeist before but which Beckham has – with this collection, and elements of the one before – taken and made her own. Hemlines stayed below the knee for 26 out of the 32 outfits in this collection, a confident statement of belief in the trend from a woman whose toned legs, in short dresses, once formed a key part of her personal brand. (For the record, backstage, the designer was in a simple sweater, not too snug, and a calf-length skirt.) The show was the first for which Beckham had designed shoes under her own brand. There was not a stiletto to be seen: instead, she embraced the modish trend for a heavy, less feminine shoe. Heels were bulky platforms, and most of the shoes were flat. A floral-embellished, pointy loafer-brogue hybrid was the standout.
"My starting point was the idea of a uniform," Beckham said after her show. Apron-styling, square patch pockets and soft military detailing lent a workwear edge to the trademark polished Beckham aesthetic. "I wanted something minimal and graphic with a slightly raw element. Over the seasons I've loosened up the fit of my clothes – but they still make you look long and lean, they're still wearable."
This autumn sees the opening of the first Victoria Beckham store, in Mayfair. As her husband and her 15-year-old son Brooklyn joined the designer backstage, Beckham joked that her store – like her shows – would be a family affair. "I'll be behind the till; David will be the doorman; Brooklyn will be my Saturday boy."
Big business and financial investors, not consumers, will force better conditions in the world's textile factories, according to the head of an investment firm aiming to pump $500m (£306m) into creating a more ethical garment industry.
With his Italian shoes, expensive watch and glossy hairstyle, Oliver Niedermaier seems a far cry from an eco-warrior or workers' rights activist. But the former partner at US private equity firm Advent International is sitting in one of Dhaka's swankiest western-style hotels, arguing for super-ethical clothing factories where respect for workers and the environment is paramount.
It is nearly 18 months since one of the world's worst industrial disasters, in which more than 1,100 people died and many more were injured when the eight-floor Rana Plaza garment factory building in the Bangladeshi capital collapsed last year. Since then many international retailers, workers' rights groups, factory owners and government bodies have come together to try to improve conditions in the country's $24.5bn garment industry. But few expected Wall Street to join the party.
Niedermaier is the head of Tau Investment Management, a group which wants to invest $500m in upgrading and modernising factories. It aims to attract big western brands by offering a supply base that uses modern technology to assure them of ethical standards as well as affordable prices. An in-house investigative team will aim to give assurances about the ethics of production from the cotton field to the retailer. Backed by the Soros family and Yahoo co-founder Jerry Yang, Tau is raising money to fund minority stakes in factories in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Cambodia, Vietnam and Sri Lanka this year or next.
Tau is not a charitable organisation; it believes there are profits to be made in cleaning up and modernising supply chains to create more sustainable and ethical sources of production. It may invest in fewer than five factories in Bangladesh, for example, but the aim will be to use those operators as the base to buy up other businesses and consolidate a fragmented industry made up of more than 5,000 factories.
"We are doing this because we think we can make a lot of money for our investors while we're going to have very positive impacts on communities in which our offices are operating," Niedermaier tells High Street Fashion: Weaving New Threads, a documentary which will air on BBC Radio 4 on Tuesday. "We think this is one of the biggest turnaround and growth equity opportunities in history."
He says that turnaround must be achieved without raising prices for shoppers, who may not want workers to be treated poorly, but cannot resist cheap clothing on the high street. "Unfortunately when you wait for the consumer to change the dynamics then probably it is far too late to save the system," says Niedermaier. " I think corporations and capitalist incentives are better mechanisms to change things."
While shoppers' choices are unlikely to drive change directly, Niedermaier argues that developments in communications technology, such as smart phones allowing factory workers to reveal their plight, will shine a brighter light on supply chains, giving malpractice no place to hide. Change will also be driven by increasingly tough regulations such as those in the California and UK anti-slavery legislation. "You may not be seeking transparency, but transparency is seeking you," he says. "If you are claiming that you couldn't prove that the cotton from your shirt is from child slaves in Uzbekistan, it is just not true. You can trace that, which ultimately means that corporations are being held accountable for it."
Bangladesh is already on the road to cleaning up its act, with three separate internationally backed agreements pushing through improvements to the structure and fire safety of factories, and more widespread union-backed worker representation which can help monitor conditions in future.
But changing practice in embattled developing countries such as Bangladesh, Cambodia and Thailand is not so easy. Rana Plaza did not meet planning regulations but it continued to operate because these were not enforced in a country where oversight systems are under-resourced and corruption is endemic. Stores such as Tesco, Primark, Sainsbury's and Marks & Spencer have tried to improve conditions and pay for workers with productivity, efficiency and health programmes among their Bangladeshi suppliers. These projects have seen positive results, but widespread suspicion of unions and problems ranging from lack of education to high inflation in food and accommodation costs can often see gains eroded.
Meanwhile, industry groups carrying out factory inspections have encountered difficulties in persuading the buildings' owners to fund the changes deemed necessary to make buildings safe, with some threatening legal action. MM Akash, professor of economics at Dhaka University, says: "The current owners of the industry here, the Bengali owners, some of them are traditional and do not want to upgrade." He adds that Tau's capital might tempt some, but the industry's many family businesses will be unwilling to give up a stake to a foreign investor. "They will ask the foreigners to lend them money."
But Rob Wayss, executive director of the Accord on Fire and Building Safety, which is overseeing improvements at nearly 1,600 factories for more than 150 retailers and brands including Marks & Spencer and H&M, insists that the industry must modernise or lose business. "The garment industry is an enormous element of the national economy, and that is an understatement. There is no option but to fix these factories and keep them safe, and demonstrate they can keep them safe, if the industry is to survive," he says. For some, that could make cash from the likes of Tau a lifeline.
For those who accuse the fashion industry of taking itself a little seriously, the "live immersive experience" held by British designer Gareth Pugh at New York fashion week on Thursday might have seemed like a case in point.
Rather than staging a conventional catwalk show, Pugh's spring/summer 2015 collection was modelled by performers in the dimly-lit chambers of New York City's Pier 36. In scenes choreographed by Wayne McGregor, models danced and writhed; one levitated high above the rest, arms outstretched beatifically, strips of white fabric radiating like angel's wings.
While that might sound slightly over the top on paper, Pugh's event was actually bang on the money, setting the stage for a New York fashion week packed with spectacles rather than traditional catwalk shows. On Sunday, for example, the hip New York label Opening Ceremony is to host a Spike Jonze-directed play with actors wearing the New York designers' new collection. Other planned "happenings" include an undisclosed Polo Ralph Lauren event in Central Park and a project by Jeremy Scott, which the designer has said will involve Miley Cyrus and "a group of cool kids, rather than models". Meanwhile, Mulberry is to take the unusual step of involving members of the public in proceedings, staging a city-wide treasure hunt for a Cara Delevingne bag.
The rise of the "happening" this New York fashion week again raises the issue of whether catwalk shows – which have their roots in the Parisian couture houses of the 1800s – are a valid focus for the modern fashion industry. Twice a year, fashion buyers and editors travel en masse to the fashion capitals of New York, London, Paris and Milan to review the clothes set for release in shops six months later. But as the luxury industry becomes ever-more globalised – and as bloggers play critics while Instagram drives sales – the relevance of showing collections to a few hundred industry types sitting in hierarchical rows is increasingly being called into question.
In the digital age, there is the potential for shows to also be the basis for social media-friendly moments with a much wider impact. "The Chanel supermarket show in March had such a huge impact on social media – and we are still talking about it now," said Paula Reed, creative director of online retailer MyTheresa and former Grazia style director. But Reed was cautious about pronouncing the death of traditional catwalk shows. "I would never say that these shows are over. People have been saying that for 20 years but it never happens – because no one has come up with a better way to help press and buyers understand and digest their work.
"I'm dying to see a Spike Jonze play," said Reed, "but I would probably do that in my spare time and discuss it with friends over dinner afterwards. But during the shows I have maybe 10 appointments and deadlines; I'm trying to see everything and get a job done." In other words, while "happenings" might create social media buzz, catwalk shows remain the first choice for business.
Global leaders, businesses, and organisations are currently working on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which will be agreed upon in collaboration with the UN next year. Rami Abdelrahman, programme coordinator for the Sweden Textile Water Initiative believes that a dedicated SDG on water is crucial for guiding water resource users towards sustainable management.
For the fashion industry, access to water is essential for cotton cultivation, textile dyeing and finishing. With water use predicted to increase by 50% between 2007 and 2025 in developing countries and 18% in developed ones, there is a growing awareness of the potential challenges that come from increasing competition for this finite resource.
These concerns are translating into collaboration. In Bangladesh, the Partnership for Cleaner Textile (PaCT) brings together buyers, factories and technical specialists to improve its textile wet processing sector. The Better Mill Initiative in China is focused on solutions for the conservation of water and energy, pollution, and improved chemical management. It began as a collaboration between Solidaridad and H&M and has since involved brands including C&A, Primark and New Look.
In Sweden too, a sector wide collaboration is underway between the Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI) and around 30 Swedish brands to assess water risk in supply chains and develop industry guidelines for the sustainable use of water resources in processes.
However, it’s not all good news as Cate Lamb, head of CDP’s water programme points to CDP research indicating that water-related issues are still low on the agenda of business leaders across all sectors.
CDP’s Global Water Report 2013 found that almost 60% of 500 global companies have already experienced the detrimental impacts of water. In 2011 for example, floods in Thaliand forced Intel to cut its revenue forecast by $1bn and Gap was forced to cut its profit forecast by 22% after drought cut into the cotton crop in Texas.
There is a clear business case in water as a cost-carrier of energy, waste and chemicals. As Solidaridad’s senior programme manager, Marieke Weerdesteijn points: “if excessive water is used in textile dyeing, it needs to be heated, more process chemicals are needed and [then] after the process treated in the effluent treatment plant. When you add these costs, water saving measures do show a good return on investment.”
Often though as Laila Petrie of WWF says, the real business case for responsible water stewardship isn’t about profit and loss, but about brand reputation and securing a social licence to operate.
When it comes to water, fashion brands face the same risks across their supply chains. As Stuart Harker, managing director of the Business Environmental Performance Initiative (BEPI) notes, an inclusive and pragmatic approach is paramount to achieving the fashion industry’s water ambitions.
The geographical dispersion of production sites is low and therefore different players can benefit from collaborating on select engagements in priority river basins.
Some argue that the large-scale production of textiles should move to countries where there is more water, more forms of clean energy and an infrastructure capable of water recycling.
Felix Ockborn, responsible for H&M’s corporate water strategy argues that the issue should be looked at more holistically. The textile industry has been key to economic development in many countries and is tied to issues such as job creation and economic empowerment. Although some smaller brands are moving production back to G20 countries, CDP’s Lamb believes big brands will lose out on an opportunity to create meaningful action if they walk away.
According to WWF, it can take up to 2,700 litres to produce the cotton needed to make a single t-shirt. The Better Cotton Initiative is trying to minimise this environmental impact by educating farmers on reducing water and pesticide use.
Novozymes meanwhile, has been working on creating water savings in textile processing and its global marketing director Peter Faaborg, says that enzymatic textile processing can save up to 25% of the water traditionally used in cotton textile manufacturing.
Still, cotton is ranked in class E (least sustainable) in the Made-BY environmental benchmark for fibres. Made-BY senior consultant, Ariel Kraten, contends that cotton could be replaced by CRAiLAR, a class B fibre which, like linen, comes from the fast-growing flax plant. CRAiLAR is turned into a fibre more like cotton when spun using a particular enzyme process.
The chemicals left in water limit the ability to recycle it, but Levi’s recently worked with one of its Chinese suppliers to make 100,000 pairs of jeans using 100% recycled water, so it can be done.
However, water regulation (or lack of it) is a huge determining factor in the speed at which water recycling will gain ground. Weerdesteijn says it is likely to be adopted far faster in China than in Bangladesh, because cleaner production is part of government policy in China, along with a gradual increase in water recycling in specific sectors.
Through easy, low-cost measures like installing nozzles on hoses, quite a lot of water and energy can be saved. When existing processes are optimised for sustainability, the next step is identifying process modifications such as the use of enzymes or high fixation and low salt dyestuffs.
By educating and training factory management and workers on sustainable water and energy, typically low-tech solutions such as identifying leaks, fixing broken pipes and reusing heated water can be applied at home and in communities.
Beyond fields, factory floors and high street shelves, one of the biggest water impacts of fashion happens at home. Initiatives such as Clever Care and the Sustainable Apparel Coalition’s Higgs Index have the potential to increase consumer awareness around sustainable fashion but there are immediate practical steps you can take to minimise your water footprint. You can air instead of wash, choose good detergents and efficient wash programs, and hand unwanted garments into recycling programmes.
WWF’s Petrie presents three important questions to ask of your favourite brands: Are they setting targets on managing their supply chain water impacts? Are the moving towards more sustainable raw materials? Are they working with others to address water problems in important river basins?
Read more like this:
The sustainable fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
The last official summer month ends today and the fabled "September issues" of magazines are already on the shelves, full of key fashion trends for autumn. However, they all come under the umbrella of "rules are there to be broken".
People always say that about style, don't they? That the truly stylish do not follow trends but set their own. They ignore convention to create their unique, ground-breaking look! I have seen this theory put forward in three different fashion columns over the last week alone.
One of them, for example, was looking back on the summer of 2014 as "the season that sleepwear became daywear". The mould-breaking trendsetters were Stella McCartney, who apparently showed pyjamas on the catwalk in 2012, and Rihanna, Rita Ora and Kate Moss, who then wore them in public. We lumbering non-fashionistas finally cottoned on two years later and have been wearing pyjamas everywhere.
Well, I haven't. But people have. A spokesman for Debenhams said: "The summer of 2014 will be remembered as the year of 'sleepwear and the city'."
This is a real-life example of that terrifying scene in The Devil Wears Prada where Meryl Streep explains to Anne Hathaway that her frumpy blue jumper is a trickle-down result of the "ceruleans" that were shown on the catwalk two years before. Anne Hathaway's character thinks she is beyond the reach of The System; in fact, she's right in the belly of the whale.
When you embrace "sleepwear and the city", you aren't breaking rules to magnificent effect. You're just a weirdo going round Asda in your nightie. Anyone who realises you're doing it for fashion reasons would only be the sort of person who knows you're two years behind Rita Ora – and God knows that's no place to be.
None of these people is a real revolutionary, by the way. Their rebellions operate within acceptable parameters, conducted in a pack, so nothing is ever truly shocking. Vivienne Westwood goes to visit Julian Assange at the Ecuadorian embassy to align herself with an acceptable rule-breaker; I haven't seen her visiting Rolf Harris.
Similarly, if you've been tricked into thinking that you're making your own rules when you "mix designer with high street" or pair a dinner jacket with a jazzy bootlace tie, those are rule-breaks within the rules.
If you want to surprise, you'll have to try harder than that. For the coming season, I have hatched some fashion plans that literally nobody else will be doing. Take this, convention!
It's impossible – indeed, paradoxical – to be a rule-breaker while copying the fashion revolutions of Kate Moss or Alexa Chung.
However, that doesn't mean you have to work from an entirely blank page. You can "channel" a fashion icon in your head, just make it somebody outside the in-crowd. For example, legendary Welsh golfer Ian Woosnam. Or 19th-century nurse Mary Seacole. Former shadow home secretary Shirley Williams, fictional pirate Mr Smee, celebrated peacenik Gandhi.
You want to be different? Be the only person at the party who's come as Catherine Parr.
Many fashion-conscious women take two bags out for the day: a big, practical one to shove under the desk and a small, clutchy one for show.
But how does that help when you're at a smart social occasion with no desk available? I have never seen anyone actually using two handbags at once. So that is what I'll be doing for autumn/winter 2014. From the front, you'll see a woman in elegant evening dress with a sparkly baguette. Turn me round and you'll see the giant rucksack on my back.
Ever since Sex and the City, it has been considered OK for your bra to be showing under clothes. But have you noticed that it's only ever done with a cute, lacy bra? Nobody does this with a 36FF hammock from John Lewis or a vast pair of beige nylon pants. Not deliberately, anyway.
I eschew "control underwear" on principle. There's nothing wrong with being thin if you just are. I'm not. Pretending to be thin via use of invisible Spanx strikes me as a bizarre attempt at conforming to a set of modern socio-aesthetic rules that don't interest me anyway.
Visible Spanx, I suddenly realise, would be another matter entirely.
A pair of hipster trousers with the biting waistline of control pants resplendent above them? A miniskirt with the extended grip of "shaping britches" protruding below? Well, that's not a pretence, is it? It's upfront. Unexpected. Satirical. Painfully (literally, painfully) honest. And its honest message is: I'm making an effort. Perfect for a wedding or office Christmas party.
Tattoos have become too fashionable. Every sexy girl you see has got a Chinese character on one arm or a leafy tendril swirling up a leg.
So far, I have rebelled by having no tattoos at all. This season, I'm going the other way: through delicacy and out the other side. Come November, I shall have a full naval battle emblazoned across my face.
Personal shoppers and stylists are famously good at getting you into something you would never have chosen for yourself. They say it takes a professional eye to see that you could actually look amazing in all those colours, shapes and lengths that you alone would never have considered trying on.
But does it? Save money on a stylist by simply Googling your favourite fashion chain or designer, browsing the pages and buying anything you think looks hideous.
In brutal close-up, images by the American photographer Bruce Gilden show faces battered by a lifetime of heavy industrial work – and the unlined smooth face of Conor, one of the youngest workers at the Tate & Lyle sugar refinery in London, with an expression that suggests he's looking into an uncertain future.
Gilden, best known for his street photography, joins eight other Magnum photographers in Open For Business, an exhibition on tour and now at the Science Museum, which captures the new face of British industry. The images include a sausage maker showing off his new range for the Chinese market, a rigger positioning Shaun the Sheep beside his tiny tree at the Aardman studios, and a lone scenery painter dwarfed by the forest he is creating on a giant backdrop for the opera Lohengrin.
Conor has been sent a copy of his portrait – among the first colour images Gilden has exhibited in the UK – as have all the other workers photographed, including the owner of a magnificently tattooed hand at the Vauxhall plant, and the man with a hole worn through the sole of his shoe captured at the Bombardier works at Derby by Mark Power wriggling on his stomach under a desk.
With one exception, the manufacturers agreed immediately to give the photographers free range, explained Emma Chetcuti, director of Multistory, which created the project. The exception was a steel plant, which suggested they should pay for the privilege of coming in. "It turned out afterwards that they were making major redundancies at the time, so there were clearly a few tensions about."
Although some giant projects were captured, including Stuart Franklin's monumental black-and-white images of the 280m aircraft carrier HMS Queen Elizabeth, many of the industries are small craft operations with a high percentage of skilled handwork.
The photographer David Hurn comes from a coal mining background in Cardiff and lives in Tintern. He says he still gets overseas commissions for pictures of miners sitting in a tin bath having their backs scrubbed by their wives.
"I have to explain to them that that's all gone. Coal was killed by Maggie Thatcher, slate is gone, steel has been decimated. The future has to lie in small-scale skilled manufacturing – and what you get there is a real community spirit, as strong as in the coal mines.
"Shifting seven tons of coal by hand in a day was an awful job, but when your life depends on your colleagues, you have to trust them – that's the spirit that was nearly lost."
Hurn photographed Alison Tod's workshop in Abergavenny where she makes hats he thinks could stand alone as sculptures. He also revelled in the spirit of both the workers and the rainbow colours at Corgi Hosiery in Ammanford which makes cashmere socks – including a range designed by Prince Charles in the colours of all the regiments he heads – employing people from within a five-mile radius, several of whom have been there for more than 50 years.
Some of the exhibition's photographs show such traditional industrial scenes – with sparks flying and metal being bashed, including those taken by Peter Marlow in the Black Country – that they could be archive images from the heroic age of British engineering. But it turns out that this aluminium works is actually creating components for a Bugatti supercar.
Although many of the images look like hard and boring work, some are scenes of quiet beauty: Alessandra Sanguinetti caught Trudi Madden, a cashier in the Siemens canteen in Cheshire, somehow as elegant as a Vermeer lady in her blue hairnet and nylon cap.
Ben Russell, curator of mechanical engineering at the Science Museum, said the exhibition gave him hope. "People often say to me that Britain makes nothing any more – this exhibition gives the lie to that. The skills are still here, and the imagination. Britain cannot compete with China or the far east in mass manufacturing, but oriental workers are not going to accept such low wages for ever: the tide could turn. I'm very upbeat."
• Open for Business is at the Science Museum in London, free, until 2 November, then touring
• This article was amended on 25 August 2014. An earlier version said the exhibition had opened at the Science Museum in London and would then go on tour. The exhibition opened in Bradford and is now touring.
Burberry chief executive Christopher Bailey has sold £5.2m of shares in the luxury fashion company, four months after taking over from predecessor Angela Ahrendts.
Bailey has offloaded 68,667 shares and nearly three quarters of two sets of performance related shares granted in 2011 and 2009 when he was the company's chief creative officer and which recently vested. It is understood that nearly half of the shares granted under the performance related schemes were sold to cover taxes. Of the remainder, half were retained and half were cashed out.
Bailey now owns 303,110 shares in the company worth £4.4m, 13% more than he owned prior to receiving the share awards.
The company said: "Christopher Bailey has exercised the option on a number of shares that he was awarded during his time as chief creative officer. As part of this process the number of Burberry shares he actually owns has increased. There are only certain times of the year when board members of a public company can sell shares which is why he is doing this now."
The sale comes at a sensitive time after shareholders last month slapped down the company for handing Bailey share awards worth £20m – which he will begin to receive from next year. At Burberry's annual shareholder meeting in London, 52.7% of investor votes opposed the brand's pay report which laid out details of the share awards to Bailey which had no performance targets attached.
He is also in line for a potential one-off performance-related award of shares worth £7.6m, set outas part of his pay deal on promotion in May – in addition to his £1m salary and potential £2m annual bonus.
Chairman John Peace said at the annual general meeting: "We know the amount paid to Christopher is a lot of money but much of it is performance-related and he will receive it only if Burberry performs strongly." Burberry argued last month that Bailey's pay is in line with other luxury-goods companies. Prada's Miuccia Prada reportedly earned £11.7m in 2013.
Asked at the AGM whether he would return some of the shares, Bailey said: "It's not about giving something up. It is not something I made the decision on, it is the remuneration committee and the chairman and the board."
Asked about the step up from chief creative officer to chief executive, he said: "I was never sitting there with a pencil drawing clothes. It's about having a vision and leading the team and ensuring consistency around the globe." Burberry, which dates back to 1856, has traditionally been known for its classic trench coats but has widened its appeal as a luxury brand using celebrity models such as Cara Delevingne and Emma Watson in its advertising campaigns.
Back when I founded People Tree more than 20 years ago, making fashion that had a minimal impact on the environment was not necessarily the norm. Since the beginning, our aim has been to incorporate the local traditional craft skills of our producers into the product design of People Tree fashions. We work globally with producers in developing countries to create our clothes and fabric jewellery.
From the start, it was important for me that we work with fair trade groups that prioritise women’s rights and work to produce in a more environmentally friendly way, which at the time was not common. Today, 85% of our 4,000 producers are women – and we have more women in leadership positions than men.
I do think we buy too much new clothing - we should be buying second hand, vintage or swapping with friends. When I was 17, I used to buy second hand because I couldn’t afford new clothes – it was a real education in the importance of textile and style. Now, I get to celebrate traditional craft skills but in a contemporary way through the clothes we produce at People Tree, skills such as weaving, knitting, embroidery and block printing. It’s personally really important to me to revive and keep these ancient skills alive, while also creating livelihoods for millions of low-income people in rural areas in India and Bangladesh.
At People Tree I work closely with our producers to bring their voice to the forefront. We live in a global village where some of us have forgotten our connection to and dependency on nature and why it’s important to support communities rather than leave them vulnerable. I do think after the Rana Plaza factory tragedy, awareness has grown hugely and the media is questioning its role in the whole “splurge or spree” type of fashion. However, I think in the UK we still need to raise public awareness of the need for a different way of creating clothes that respects both workers and the planet. 
The problem with fast fashion and how to fix it
Interested in finding out more about how you can live better? Take a look at this month’s Live Better challenge here.
The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
I stopped buying new clothes last year, increasingly worried by the impact of cheap fashion. It’s been really stimulating – so I decided to step it up a bit and over the course of a month create a whole new outfit from my wardrobe without buying anything new, that would fit in with the latest fashions. I didn’t plan to buy new things, I just wanted to modify or embellish things that I already had.
At the beginning of the month, I got creative with some curtain edging. Then I was asked to attend the Observer Ethical awards so I decided that I had to make myself a dungarees dress as my attempt to be in fashion using things I already owned (I’m not really sure if dungarees dresses are in fashion, but I quite like the dress). I wasn’t planning on doing much more than that as I didn’t have much time, but towards the end of the month I wore the same dress for around seven days in a row. No one commented or seemed to notice at all.
Very cheap fashion items are now readily available. Why mend, repair or embellish something, when it is so cheap to just buy something new? But there are problems with constantly buying new clothes at such low quality. For example, many clothes contain cotton, the production of which involves a large volume of pesticides. Cotton soaks up 11-12% of the world’s pesticides, which as we know are damaging to the environment and to those that work with them. On top of this tremendous pressure is being placed on factory workers, and we only need look at Rana Plaza to know the potential tragedy of this situation. 
In addition a large proportion of clothes that are chucked out end up in landfill. According to Wrap, around £140m (350,000 tonnes) worth of used clothing goes to landfill in the UK every year – that’s around 30% of our unwanted clothing. A large proportion of our clothes is recycled, but this puts pressure on the environment too.
When I stopped buying new things and started shopping in charity shops, although it is a more eco-friendly way to shop, I had the same attitude. The clothes were so cheap I felt that I could buy as much as I liked and I didn’t take quality into account at all. Last November I decided to take things further and haven’t bought any clothes new or secondhand for myself since. But this month’s challenge really stepped things up and has been great fun. 
For anyone who doesn’t have the time, or the will, to do the same, here are a few alternative suggestions for anyone who wants to join the slow fashion movement:
This blog originally appeared on Eco Thrifty Living and has been re-published with permission. 
Why shopping sprees for clothes are on their way out
Interested in finding out more about how you can live better? Take a look at this month’s Live Better challenge here.
The Live Better Challenge is funded by Unilever; its focus is sustainable living. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
When I was a child, my dad – who could be described as the only situationist in north Wales, and who, the last time I saw him, was wearing a T-shirt with that Nye Bevan quote about Tories being vermin, the words arranged into an attractive rat motif – would often tell me I was “born to shop”. Once, when I asked him for a PlayStation, he told me I was consumer-orientated, and, while a little harsh, he was not wrong.
Growing up in the ruthlessly capitalist 90s, there was always something I wanted: a My Little Pony, a Sticker Factory set, a much lusted-after pebble-polishing machine, or – the holy grail – an unsettling incubus/doll called Make-Up Baby. Bill Bailey wasn’t lying when he described the Argos catalogue as the “laminated book of dreams”. I would spend hours perusing its pages, especially the paddling pools. I wanted everything. I got none of it.
Which makes it all the more strange that now, as an adult, I loathe shopping with a hatred I otherwise reserve only for golf. Sweet, sweet disgust. It only took one Saturday afternoon to make me realise that hell is not other people, generally. Hell is other people in the Trafford Centre.
I realise that my hatred of shopping means that I am, essentially, a failure as a woman. Advanced capitalism really has no need for me. I have been to neither of the Westfields, and regard the notion that shopping is somehow a “hobby” that you partake in with your “girlfriends” as one of the great, evil cons of modern life. Which is why the news, if you can call it that, that so-called “smart mannequins” – which “talk” to shoppers via their smartphones – were launched in some stores yesterday, filled me with horror. If these smart mannequins sound to you like an unholy cross between something out of ETA Hoffman’s The Sandman and Teen Talk Barbie (“I love shopping!” “Math is hard!”) then have a seat: you are my people. If you feel that this initiative will, in many ways, enhance your shopping experience, just move along.
Going into shops is bad enough, without them introducing new gimmicks to sell us stuff. The three-way mirrors in H&M already make for a traumatic experience (it’s you, babe, but even more so!), and earlier this year it was announced that a plus-size store in Uxbridge would have “interactive changing rooms” that would pay inmates compliments as they try on clothes. Because “you go, girl!” and “fierce!” is really what I want to hear when I’m sweatily squeezing into a pair of disco knickers. (Not true. That’s what the robot Tyra Banks I keep at home is for.)
And this is all before we even consider the two most terrifying words in the English language: concept store. Especially the ones that pretend to be nightclubs. I have a friend whose job it was to dance on the spot in Abercrombie and Fitch, like a beautiful bear in short shorts being poked by an invisible stick for the minimum wage. Then again, even Abercrombie is not as alarming as M&M’s World, a vortex of evil that no Londoner ever enters but which has achieved the capitalist dream, transcending its mere status of sweet shop, to become an inexplicable tourist attraction. It’s destination shopping.
I should add that all this doesn’t mean I don’t like buying things (I love fashion, though I am cautious about the ethical provenance of my purchases), I just do it online. My boyfriend once killed himself laughing when he found a list on my computer that included the phrase “butter dish”. I think it confirmed what he had always suspected: that women are alien beings obsessed with useless objects. It is true, I have been bred to purchase. There are only so many times that you can open the pages of Marie Claire to see the words “Obsession: scatter cushions” without thinking “hmmm … scatter cushions. Shall I? I shall.”
The modern woman has so many problems to fix: emotional cellulite, bacne, cankles, camel toe, bacteria in the toilet bowl of which only 99% can be eradicated. Soon there will automated text messages sent straight to our all-seeing, extrasensory phones: “We have a product for that hair sprouting from your chin”; “we know how you can fix that smell”; “looking a bit fat today, love”. It’s only a matter of time. Thankfully, my dad is building a bunker.
Of all the dangerous ways to take a selfie, whooshing across a concrete ramp on a skateboard is up there. But this is the House of Vans, a new subterranean skatepark in the bowels of Waterloo station in London.
In its previous guise as the Old Vic Tunnels, the underground space was where intrepid audiences lapped up performances by the experimental theatre group Punchdrunk. Now, tattooed skateboarders with long hair and long shorts chase air on a vertiginous concrete bowl that to the uninitiated screams head injury.
After the Old Vic vacated the old railway arches, the lease is understood to have become the subject of a fierce bidding war. Vans, a brand synonymous with skateboarding, is thought to have beaten off competition from Apple and Nike. It has taken over what is potentially a potent youth culture venue, next to London's biggest legal graffiti wall and the nearby undercroft skate park on the banks of the Thames, which was recently rescued from developers by the mayor of London.
Although skateboarding has waxed and waned in popularity since the 1950s, skateboarding fashion has taken on a life of its own, with Vans' sales on track to hit $2bn (£1.19bn) this year as more non-skaters embrace its uniform of chunky-soled trainers, T-shirts and hoodies.
"Vans is not only about skating – that is a very small segment – but it's the core and we will always protect it," says Karl Heinz Salzburger, who runs the international operation of the brand's US owner, VF Corporation.
The venue, he says, will be an "amazing vehicle to engage and inspire youth culture". To judge from the skaters testing out its ramps at the opening last Thursday, that will mean 40-somethings as well as teenagers arriving on foot or on four wheels to attend concerts or film screenings under the cavernous arches.
Vans was founded in 1966 by Paul Van Doren, a California entrepreneur who was quick to spot the growing popularity of skateboarding, developing trainers with distinctive thick soles that were perfect for gripping, and reinforced toes to cope with the friction as skaters honed their carving skills on pavements outside their homes.
It lost its independence a decade ago when it was swallowed by the VF Corporation, which owns more than 30 clothing brands including the outdoor specialist The North Face and jeans labels Lee and Wrangler.
But in recent years VF, which shortened its name from Vanity Fair after it sold off the lingerie brand of the same name, has been caught off guard by Vans' success, with demand for its products rocketing in the UK at the start of this decade.
"When we bought Vans in 2004 it was a $300m company," says Salzburger, a warm Italian who goes by the name of KH to his colleagues. "It grew very nicely, but then three years ago it exploded. It grew too fast, which is a little bit unhealthy – we don't want to be a fashion brand because fashion is cyclical, it comes and goes."
With so many brands under its belt VF is mindful of the need to protect its most successful names from overexposure. It has refused to supply The North Face, which last year turned over $2bn for the first time, to UK sportswear retailer Sports Direct due to its "pile it high sell it cheap" philosophy.
"Consumers don't know VF: there are no VF stores in the world or any advertising," says Salzburger, who admits even he hadn't heard of the company when it came knocking for The North Face, where he was chief executive of the European business, in 2000. "We act and think by brand. Every brand has an organisation and sometimes a physical home: Vans sits in southern California, whereas The North Face is in northern California. We always plan group marketing, sales, retail and product development by brand to make sure it makes sense to its consumers wherever they are."
Lorna Hall, head of market intelligence at the trend forecaster WGSN, seconds the strategy. "VF understands that you can't mess with the brand, that the brand is owned by the community who use it and that they can sniff out inauthenticity," she says. "It's about how skilful you are as a management house and VF have quite an enlightened way of managing brands. They are always questioning what to do and trying to innovate."
The formula seems to work. VF, which also owns Timberland, JanSport, Eastpak and Reef, recently set a new target to increase sales from last year's $11.4bn to $17.3bn by 2017. VF's skill in fostering nascent demand for its products is perhaps most apparent in China, where it is helping to invent an outdoors culture to dress in The North Face gear, as there is no tradition of weekend yomps. Sponsorship of endurance races and expeditions up Haba mountain helped produce sales growth of more than 20% in Asia Pacific last year.
Adidas is planning its biggest-ever advertising campaign next year as it fights back against rival Nike.
The world's second-largest sportswear maker has admitted that it needs to invest more in its brands to catch up with market leader Nike, after losing ground in developed markets. Herbert Hainer, the chief executive of the German company, promised the "most ambitious" brand campaign in the company's history for 2015.
"It is with disappointment that after such a great summer of sport, I have to report that our group has not been able to meet the high expectations we laid out," he said. "We take full responsibility to rectify our shortfalls swiftly."
He added: "We need to raise our game. I'm a striker and I want to win. It is obvious that we will have to go back to the training ground."
Hainer said Adidas would lift its marketing budget from 13% to 14% of sales in 2015, raising it by up to €200m (£159m).
Adidas on Thursday cut its profit margin outlook for this year after a 13% slide in operating profits to €220m in the second quarter. It took a hit from volatile emerging markets currencies, in particular the weaker Russian rouble, coupled with disappointing golf sales. It plans to restructure its golf arm, TaylorMade, at which sales fell by 18%, but Hainer refused to give details on job cuts.
The company already lowered its sales and profit estimates last week despite receiving a boost from the World Cup in Brazil, the advent of which is expected to lead to record sales of €2bn in football products – from replica shirts to footballs. Adidas sold more than 14m of the official World Cup "Brazuca" balls, and more than 8m football jerseys. It kitted out nine teams, including champions Germany as well as Argentina and Colombia.
Adidas recently won a 10-year contract to be Manchester United's kit sponsor for a record-breaking minimum guarantee of £750m. The deal will kick in at the start of the 2015-16 season, ending Nike's 13-year relationship with the club.
Nearly two-thirds of its sales are made through third-party retailers, but Adidas has now invested in opening more of its own shops because they are more profitable. However, it has scaled back store openings in Russia, where it runs about 1,000 shops. Russia is its third-biggest market. The escalating crisis in Ukraine has made Russians more reluctant to shop.
The company's shares tumbled more than 11% after last week's profit warning and traded down 3.5% Thursday afternoon. Adidas expects to make a profit of €650m this year, down from the €820m to €930m previously forecast. Analysts at Citi said they remained sceptical about the outlook for the stock, given the scaled-back investment in Russia, higher marketing costs and adverse currency trends.
Sex and the City and Manolo Blahnik: for the past decade it has been nigh-on impossible to mention one without the other, such is the symbiotic relationship between the show's heroine, Carrie, and the high-end shoe brand. 
The US TV series may have made household names of a slew of now well-known designers – indeed, much has been made of the unique relationship between the show and its loose attitude towards product placement – but did you know that Gummy Bears get more mentions than Calvin Klein? Or that Tivo is referenced more than Ralph Lauren? Who knew that Band Aid is mentioned three times as many as Armani? Or that Captain Crunch cereal gets twice as many namedrops as Balenciaga?
Pierre Butin, a 27-year-old artist from Paris with an improbable amount of time on his hands, did, after watching every episode and editing a video montage that names every. Single. Brand. namechecked in the show within context. It's more than nine minutes long, but well worth watching (if only for the Post-It bit).
The British Fashion Council is to encourage burgeoning fashion designers to consider the opportunities presented by the high street, rather than solely focusing on the rarefied world of the catwalk, with the launch of a new initiative on Wednesday.
Titled BFC Contemporary, the eBay-sponsored scheme will offer a handful of designers tailored programmes of advice and mentoring with a view to high-street success. Women’s ready-to-wear designers Alexis Barrell, Georgia Harding, Paper London, Zoë Jordan and sunglasses and swimwear brand Prism, have been selected for the inaugural season. 
As part of the scheme, the designers will create limited edition pieces to be sold within a specialist BFC Contemporary Shop on eBay, at Somerset House at the BFC’s London Fashion Week pop-up shop in September.
The initiative was launched in response to increasing global demand for "contemporary" fashion – labels such as Acne, The Kooples, Maje and Sandro which sit at the high end of the high street but do not usually show during fashion weeks. In the UK, the market is relatively small, and contemporary designers tends not to enjoy the profile of their catwalk counterparts. Here, says the BFC’s Sophie McElligott, “we pride ourselves on young creatives showing extravagant catwalk collections, and they are brilliant, but some designers want to dress more people and to do it more quickly. This is about seeing those designers not as a niche presence but as a part of London fashion week and the British Fashion Council.”
“Often, when fashion students graduate, they are encouraged to become catwalk designers and to focus on showing at London fashion week” she continues. “We recognised that a lot of designers can’t afford to start their business by creating high-end artisinal pieces, or by putting on fashion shows, which are very expensive. There is nothing wrong with that system, but it’s not for everyone.”
The US firm that once persuaded a US president and A-list Hollywood stars that colourful plastic clogs were stylish footwear has unveiled a big drop in profits and is to close more than 100 stores around the world.
Crocs is laying off about 180 staff after profits slumped more than 40%. The company, which is listed on the US stock exchange, said it would also be slashing its product range in order to save $10m a year by 2015. In the last three months, profits dropped 44%. The company did not say where it would close stores, but its outlets in the Americas and Asia saw trading slump by more than 6%. Crocs' European stores were the only ones to see underlying sales growth.
Conceived as footwear for use on boats back in 2002, the footwear became a hit in the mid-2000s, with "Crocophiles" including Al Pacino, George W Bush and Jack Nicholson. By 2005, production had hit a million shoes a month. It listed in 2006, but by 2009 profits were diving as the trend slipped away. The business was forced to shut factories and lay off staff.
Six months ago Blackstone, the private equity firm, invested £117m in a 13.5% stake in the company, which has about 600 stores around the world, including three in the UK.
Andrew Rees, the company's president, said: "We have a clear, well-defined strategy for addressing these issues and improving performance. Work is under way already to drive significant change throughout our company."
Work to bring Bangladeshi factories used by north American retailers, including Walmart and Gap, up to fire and building safety standards will cost more than $150m (£87.9m) and take at least 18 months to complete.
In its first annual report, the US Alliance for Bangladeshi Worker Safety, formed in the wake of the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Dhaka in which more than 1,100 people died last April, said it had completed fire and building safety inspections of all the 587 factories its members now used.
Ten factories had been closed or partially closed, as a result of structural faults being revealed by inspections and members now used 600 factories against nearly 800 registered a year ago.
Ian Spaulding, a senior adviser to the Alliance, said: "People are realising that they can't just buy from any factory." Overall orders from Bangladesh had not been cut but consolidated among fewer suppliers. The use of fewer suppliers is likely to cause unease in Bangladesh where factory owners fear they will lose business to rival countries as a result of the crackdown after the Rana Plaza disaster. Alongside the Alliance, a 170-plus group of international retailers including Primark and Marks & Spencer are backing the Bangladesh Accord on Fire & Building Safety which is inspecting more than 1,500 clothing factories. The Bangladesh government, backed by funds from the UK and The Netherlands is also inspecting thousands more garment production facilities.
Spaulding said that a key part of maintaining standards in Bangladesh's clothing factories would be the introduction of democratic institutions, such as trade unions, that support workers rights and there remained some resistance from factory owners. In April, it emerged that fewer than 300 of Bangladesh's 5,000 clothing factories allowed trade unions.
It's unusual to see a magazine editor pulling a box of McDonald's French fries from her Chanel handbag at haute couture fashion week. But that was the unlikely occurrence in Paris last week – or so it seemed.
The reality was decidedly calorie-free. Made of thick, spongey, bright red and yellow plastic, the season's most prolific accessory among the style set is an iPhone case in the shape of a McDonald's carton, by Italian fashion house Moschino.
True to the spirit of fast food, counterfeit versions have appeared at lightning speed in markets and online. Obesity campaigners, however, have not been so quick to embrace the craze. Some members of the medical establishment question the wisdom of celebrating fast food at a time when one in four Britons is classed as obese and there are plans to lower the threshold for NHS weight-loss surgery for people with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes to a BMI of 30, which could see an additional 800,000 people referred.
Obesity expert and GP Dr Ian Campbell said: "My problem is that if kids are [using these iPhone cases] they are buying in to the whole fast-food concept. And while the occasional McDonald's meal is not a problem, to present it as fashion is disappointing. Is it glorifying McDonald's? I guess it is. Is it a good form of advertising for them? I guess it is."
These criticisms are unlikely to harm the popularity of the designs, which were revealed as part of designer Jeremy Scott's first catwalk show for Moschino in late February; model Lindsey Wixson held one on the catwalk, while fashion editor Anna Dello Russo used hers to take selfies with Katy Perry. In the months that followed, the cases became ever more popular with fashion editors, bloggers and celebrities. Rihanna and Rita Ora were photographed with theirs; Miley Cyrus brandished one on stage.
The problem for fashion brands is that designer iPhone cases are easy to copy, according to Jason Rawkins, head of fashion and luxury brands at solicitors Taylor Wessing. The Moschino case costs around £45; fakes are being sold for as little as £3.
"Social media means that news travels faster and things become popular much more quickly," said Rawkins. "So if the counterfeiters don't move really fast themselves they could miss the boat; two months later the bubble might burst."
Increasingly designers are fighting this by speeding up their own operations, releasing next season's collections straight after the catwalk show. Sure enough, the Moschino iPhone cases were available from midnight on the day of the fashion show. In the UK, the first vendor was Browns, where the entire iPhone's stock sold within half a day.
The social media buzz around that show was unprecedented; the brightly coloured clothes, using familiar motifs – from Happy Meal handbags to dresses inspired by sweet wrappers – seemed specifically designed to be irresistible on Instagram. And once the images had been disseminated widely, controversy created publicity that money can't buy. Columnists decried the hypocrisy of the fashion industry celebrating fast food; others ran quotes from restaurant workers comparing their paltry wages to the prices of the collection.
There was much debate, too, about whether Moschino was infringing on the McDonald's copyright, but a McDonald's spokesperson said: "We've signed a licence agreement with Moschino that allows them to use McDonald's intellectual property on the merchandise. Moschino will make a donation to Ronald McDonald House Charities."
Certainly, the collection seems unlikely to do the golden arches any damage. For the customers who buy into the Moschino aesthetic, the iPhone case is an expression of absurdity and fun. Scott has often spoken about Moschino as a brand centred on irony and irreverence, and has spelt out his desire to bring Moschino to a younger audience.
The iPhone cases also tie into a wider "logo mania mood we have seen on a number of catwalks that references 90s nostalgia", according to Natalie Kingham, buying director at matchesfashion.com. Though Moschino was at the forefront of the first wave of logo mania in the 1990s, this time around it is deployed with more complex and knowing layers. Scott's first Moschino menswear collection, for example, saw the designer creating "knock-offs" of fellow luxury brands, from Louis Vuitton to Hermès – an idea that suggests he would be unfazed by the Camden Market copies of his brand's iPhone cases.
In any case, Moschino seems to have alighted on the recipe for quickfire success in the social media age: immediately arresting design, speedy production, social media dominance and a side order of controversy.
It is the winter of 2000 and Rose Marie Bravo is sitting alone at the back of Milan's Grand Hotel awaiting the arrival of a 29-year-old Yorkshireman.
The then boss of the British luxury fashion label Burberry had just begun her search for a new designer and had been alerted to a little-known talent working for Tom Ford at Gucci. His name was Christopher Bailey.
Suddenly, her candidate appeared, strolling into the hotel wearing jeans, a blazer and a white shirt – his skinny frame making him look "about 19, never mind 29".
"He was so slight of build. Cute. I thought my goodness," gushes Bravo. "When I saw him coming to me, before he even said a word, I said to myself 'he's the guy.' It sounds crazy to repeat it. I could never lose that sense that he was right. I felt very silly."
As everyone in fashion knows, Bailey was hired as Burberry's new designer – but Bravo says she forced herself to interview 30 other candidates, put in front of her by the fashion headhunter Floriane de Saint Pierre, so she could justify her hunch to the board of directors.
Bailey's Burberry career progressed just as smoothly following that moment too, with Bravo handing him more and more responsibility, including the company's marketing brief. Under her successor, Angela Ahrendts, the Halifax-born son of a carpenter and a window-dresser for Marks & Spencer saw his role widen further, with responsibility for designing the fashion group's stores and even its new corporate headquarters.
When Ahrendts announced she was moving to Apple last year, Burberry's chairman, Sir John Peace, didn't even seek a Bravo-style alibi by hiring a headhunter for cover. Instead, he simply handed Bailey the top job at the £6bn company.
And that's when Bailey's serene rise suddenly started to experience some turbulence. He attended his first annual general meeting as the group's chief executive on Friday, which was most notable for a row over a rather large Burberry cheque – with more than 50% of investors voting against the company's remuneration report. Investors are furious about the nearly £20m of free shares handed to Bailey over the last four years, which they don't think have been adequately explained.
Almost as irksome has been a £440,000 cash allowance – separate from Bailey's £1.1m salary and potential £2.2m bonus – plus an additional one-off performance related award of £7.6m worth of shares when he took over as chief executive in May. These came on top of the £3.8m worth of Burberry stock he already owns, according to the company's share register.
The criticism over his pay has irritated the rookie chief executive – especially the suggestion that the company has been less than transparent and the fact that his neighbours in Yorkshire might now know how much he is worth. But the row has posed two questions for City investors: who exactly is this £20m genius and is he worth it?
Bailey was plucked from the Royal College of Art by the American designer Donna Karan, who was so taken with his work that she stripped naked in front of him to try on his collection. Supposedly, that was three minutes after meeting him.
Bailey then switched from Karan's New York base to Milan to design for Ford at Gucci and then back to London to create for Bravo at Burberry.
Few doubt Bailey has been a major contributor to the resurgence of the old brand, whose image he linked fastidiously to its British roots – particularly its association with the British weather – while modernising the company with an aggressive push towards the digital age.
As his star rose, so did his salary, and Burberry insists that, aside from the one-off award of shares, Bailey's pay package has not changed since he added the chief executive title to his chief creative role. The headhunter Saint Pierre adds: "When I see the fees that are paid to creative directors in the industry – and the Burberry figure includes Christopher's remuneration as a CEO – I say 'my God, Burberry is getting a bargain!'".
Maybe. City analysts still fret that Bailey has either taken on too much or is an unproven chief executive. But outside the Square Mile he is defended and lauded.
Old colleagues including Bravo, Karan, and the former Burberry finance director Stacey Cartwright are gushing in their praise for his abilities and leadership qualities. Bailey is intensely private (he declined to speak to the Guardian), but his allies insist that he is ruthless in focusing his time, devoid of ego and has a sharp commercial mind, while his talent and consideration for others engender loyalty.
One fashion source, who knows Bailey but who works for a much larger rival, says: "He worries he's been over-hyped, which might make him a hostage to fortune. But with a competitor's hat on, we rate him. He's making the transition to chief executive very well.
"And I'm sorry I can't really dish the dirt, because there ain't any."
Still, for those in the City who agonise that Bailey might not fully understand a balance sheet, there is evidence to suggest that he has moments of financial cunning that would make a banker proud.
Last October Bailey sold his four-bedroom Chelsea home for £7.3m, after buying it for £4.8m four years earlier and conducting extensive renovations. Six months later, a similar property on the same side of the road went for £850,000 less.
He also appears hard-nosed enough to have invested in a controversial investment scheme called Invicta Film Partnership No 23 LLP that can help defer personal taxation – which might prove an awkward conversation topic when Bailey hooks up with Rupert Harrison, who apart from being a friend is the chief economic adviser to the chancellor, George Osborne. One ally of Bailey's insists he was motivated to join the scheme in order to invest in the film industry, rather than as a method of deferring tax.
Even so, friends say Bailey lives a relatively ordinary life, considering his job and the one done by his husband, the actor Simon Woods, whom he married in a small ceremony in Chelsea in 2012. Bailey and Woods, who played Octavian in the television series Rome and starred in Pride & Prejudice with Keira Knightley, have a house in London and count the likes of Sienna Miller, Mario Testino and Chelsea Clinton as friends. Bailey designed Marc Mezvinsky's wedding suit when he married Clinton in 2010.
Yet, when Burberry's offices shut for a half-day every Friday during the summer, Bailey immediately flees this glamorous existence by boarding the train to Yorkshire, where the couple own another house. There, he is trying to learn how to repair the property's stone walls – a task he has long said he would have done professionally had he not been a designer.
That fits with his understated image, albeit one that fails to impress some in London. One social acquaintance snipes: "He's bland, which is why it has always astounded me he is so creative", while another says of the designer: "There's no aura."
Up to a point. Fourteen years ago in Milan, Bravo clearly disagreed.
Burberry has faced a huge revolt over pay with 52.7% of investors voting against the company's remuneration report after it handed the new chief executive Christopher Bailey a one-off award of shares worth nearly £15m last year.
Speaking afterwards, the Burberry chairman, Sir John Peace, said the vote against was "very disappointing".
"What we have to do is reflect on that and talk to shareholders," he said.
The vote on the remuneration report is non-binding but just over 16% of investors also voted against the company's remuneration policy at the company's annual general meeting in central London. Prior to the meeting a chorus of investor groups including Pirc and the Investment Management Association (IMA) flagged their concerns about the British fashion house's pay policies.
The 52% no vote is one of the biggest-ever protests staged by shareholders against boardroom pay. Insurer Aviva suffered a 60% vote against its pay (including abstentions) in 2012 to protest against a £2.2m golden hello for its incoming head of UK operations, resulting in the departure of its chief executive Andrew Moss.
In 2013, nearly 40% of investors failed to support a $4m (£2.5m) share award for the chief executive of mining company Randgold Resources. And in 2012, nearly one-third of shareholders declined to back Barclay's pay policy, including a £17m deal for its controversial then chairman Bob Diamond.
Bailey, who succeeded long-serving chief executive Angela Ahrendts in May, holds the title of chief creative and chief executive officer. The pay package for his enlarged role includes a £1.1m salary, annual cash bonus of up to twice salary as well as share awards worth up to four times salary. His contract also includes a £440,000 cash allowance. In addition the company handed Bailey 1m free shares last summer.
Pirc, which advised shareholders to vote against the company's remuneration policy, had cautioned that executive directors' incentive schemes were "excessive" as potential payouts could be as much as eight times base salary. The IMA, whose members manage £4.5tn of assets, issued an "amber top" alert over pay – its second most serious level of rebuke on corporate governance.
During the meeting, Peace explained that the share award was made to Bailey after a rival luxury goods company tried to poach him. "We are acutely aware that Christopher could command a much higher package outside the UK."
The company has a history of rewarding its executives handsomely. Bailey's predecessor Ahrendts, who left to join Apple in May, was one of the highest paid chief executives in the FTSE 100. Indeed, the American smashed through the glass ceiling to become the first female to top Britain's executive pay league after she earned £16.9m in 2012. The near £17m package included bonuses, benefits and proceeds from the sale of bonus shares. In her final year in charge, Ahrendts took home more than £9m after being granted early access to share bonuses worth £6.2m and a cash bonus worth £2.1m.
Investors have accepted the pay situation as the management team have been incredibly successful - Ahrendts and Bailey worked side by side for eight years. Last year adjusted pretax profits rose 8% to £461m while sales increased 17% to £2.3bn.
Burberry argues that Bailey, who joined as design director in 2001, is vital to its success and that his pay is in line with other global luxury-goods companies. For example, Prada's Miuccia Prada reportedly earned £11.7m in 2013.
Burberry is braced for a substantial protest vote at Friday's annual general meeting after the British luxury brand angered investors with a more than £20m pay deal for new chief executive Christopher Bailey.
Investor groups Pirc and the Investment Management Association (IMA) have flagged their concerns ahead of the event with proxy voting firm Manifest giving the company's pay policy and report a "D". In the past companies that have attracted that type of criticism have suffered protest votes of around 30%.
"I think there will be a significant no vote but I don't think it will be a majority," said one investor. "There seems to be a lack of clear linkage between pay and performance. Christopher Bailey has been a very successful creative director but there is no guarantee he will be a successful chief executive and Burberry are paying him as if he already is one."
In May the Guardian revealed details of Bailey's contract which includes a £440,000 cash allowance. Other elements of his remuneration include a £1.1m salary, an annual cash bonus of up to twice that salary and share awards of up to four times salary. Last summer the company also handed Bailey a one-off award of free shares worth almost £15m.
"The cash allowance isn't the key issue," said Manifest chief executive Sarah Wilson. "Very few companies in the FTSE 100 have such poor pay governance procedures so Burberry's approach is going to have disappointed many shareholders."
Pirc, which has advised shareholders to vote against the company's remuneration policy, warned, among other things, that executive directors' incentive schemes are "excessive" as potential payouts could be more than eight times their base salary. In turn the IMA, whose members manage £4.5tn of assets, issued an "amber top" alert over pay – its second most serious level of rebuke on corporate governance.
The shareholder meeting comes hot on the heels of a strong set of figures from the trenchcoat-maker. On Thursday Burberry said like-for-like sales rose 12% in the three months to 30 June which was ahead of analysts forecasts of around 8%. There was a sting in the tail, however, with finance director Carol Fairweather warning the strong pound would take a bigger bite out of profits this year than previously thought. Burberry's fixed costs are in Sterling but its revenues are in a variety of currencies with adverse movements expected to reduce annual profits by £65m rather than £50m previously outlined. That did not dent investors' enthusiasm for the company with Burberry the biggest riser in the FTSE 100 with the shares closing up more than 3% at £14.64.
Bailey, who to date has been reticent in his dealings with the business press, did not join a conference call with journalists but said in a statement: "This first quarter performance reflects our focus on striving to give customers the best possible experience of the Burberry brand through ongoing investment in retail, digital and service, both on and offline. The 12% increase in comparable sales demonstrates our teams' success in unlocking the benefits of these investments, as we continue to concentrate on the things we can control in an uncertain external environment."
Larger rivals such as Louis Vuitton and Gucci have seen sales start to slow as big spenders tire of global brands that are too ubiquitous. Demand in China, a key luxury goods market, has also been hit by a government crackdown on corruption and conspicuous spending. However Burberry bucked that trend to report growth of more than 10% in the Asia Pacific region "led by mainland China".
Burberry's continued success is in part down to its willingness to embrace the digital fashion revolution. It streams its catwalk shows online and in stores, allowing customers to order products for early delivery with a personalised touch, such as an engraved nameplate in a coat or bag. A presence on Chinese social media sites such as Sina Weibo (the country's version of Twitter), Youku (similar to YouTube) and Douban has also helped Burberry outperform rival brands in the region.
Barclays analyst Julian Easthope believes the Burberry figures will turn out to be the best of its peer group over the period: "This was despite a tough comparison with last year and reflects the group's ability to convert traffic both online and offline thanks to its investment in retail, digital and customer service."
Backpacks have come a long way. They have left the great outdoors, graduated beyond the gap year, and flocked into the city.
Just about every third bag in a London tube carriage is a backpack. They have replaced briefcases, overtaken the messenger bag in the affection of cyclists (better for a laptop), subsumed the satchel fad. Backpacks are convenient: the word itself folds at the midpoint, its two halves meeting in rhyme.
Like skinny jeans or certain brands of trainer, the backpack has achieved a kind of cultural convergence. It is worn by all social groups, standard issue for bus drivers, backpack rappers and the mayor of London. Owing to its fitness for impromptu travel and feats of heroism, it is the bag of choice for Peter Parker in The Amazing Spider-Man 2 and also for whistleblowers: as seen on Edward Snowden, Glenn Greenwald and Benedict Cumberbatch playing Julian Assange. (There are 14 directions relating to backpacks in the script for The Fifth Estate.) You are never too young for a rucksack. Prince George is nine months old and he owns a kangaroo-with-joey one. I'm not sure this is what Jack Kerouac meant when he called for "a rucksack revolution".
According to the market intelligence firm Euromonitor, the value of backpack sales in the UK has grown every year since 2008: last year they were worth $107.8m (£62m). In the US, in the same period, the market grew by 44%. The fashion e-tailer Asos stocks 412 styles – because these days, there is a backpack for everyone.
At the forefront of this development is a Canadian brand called Herschel Supply Company. If you don't know the name, you will know the rucksack.
It has clean lines, a neatly domed peak. Its zips don't gnash: they have smart, tan leather pulls. Herschel bags, like Fjallraven, Sandqvist, Eastpak and others, come in colours and patterns that talk nicely to your outfit, instead of shouting it down with technical fluorescence. Inside, they are lined with stripes – favourite motif of the preppy outsider – or paisley patterns.
To unpack the story of this one brand of backpack is to travel to the heart of early 21st-century consumerism. Herschel has grown rapidly. Its sales rose by 900% between 2010 and 2011, and by 350% the following year. It is sold in 50 countries and worn by people as diverse as Zac Efron, Seth Rogen, Raekwon, Cressida Bonas and Tego Sigel, editor of youth magazine RWD, who happens to be walking down London's Bishopsgate. Perhaps he can explain why these bags are so ubiquitous.
"Herschel is pretty cool. It's probably the top backpack brand." He lists its advantages. "Very subtle minor detailing. Decent price points. Obviously branded, but not in an obvious way. It's a post-Kanye West thing," he shrugs. "I can make music on the go, create on the go."
At 28, Sigel is the perfect age to be retrieving memories of carrying Jansport or Eastpak in the 1990s, when those brands dominated British school playgrounds. "No," he says. "It's always been Nike, Herschel."
But Herschel has not "always been" at all. It appears that way, thanks to a piece of brilliance by its founders. Sensing fashion's hankering for heritage, they invested the brand with a sense of history at its inception. The company is only five years old, but its bags look familiar, as if they have been around for ever. In a way, they have.
Herschel Supply Company was founded by Lyndon Cormack, along with his brother Jamie. Their earliest designs modernised nostalgic shapes and details (those tan leather trims) with fashionable colourways. "That's exactly what we do," he says. "To look back, see how things were created, dissect the process of the originals, but do it in a modern way.
"We buy a lot of product. We have our own sewing studio. We dissect a lot. When we see vintage product at market, whether it was used to climb Everest or an old fashion piece, we look with great interest."
Herschel takes its name from a small town in the province of Saskatchewan in Canada, where the Cormacks' grandparents lived. With its backdrop of steep ravines, big game and buffalo berry bushes, this isolated village has supplied the Cormacks with a history to turn into a commercial story.
Ando Fallshaw, co-founder of the website Carryology, which takes bags as seriously as its name suggests, has watched the growth of Herschel. In the early days, he says, the brothers "would talk about what their grandpa did. They've made people read into the brand what they want to read into it, and they've done that brilliantly."
Fallshaw is right that the story of the Cormack ancestry recurs in interviews and write-ups. This narrative tic has a visual equivalent. The sense of tradition is stitched on to each bag in the form of a diamond-shaped badge that is as recognisable as a logo, as shared and uncopyrighted as history. This diamond, which is usually cut in leather and bisected with two vertical slits, is not the mark of a single brand – although to look at Herschel bags, you could be forgiven for mistaking it as one – but of heritage.
"Early mountaineering bags had them all over," says Fallshaw. "You could pass webbing through them, and lash things on to your backpack." The lashtab, to give the diamond its technical name, has become as familiar an urban motif as a subway sign. Fallshaw, who lives in Melbourne, has even spotted them on T-shirts and caps. The lashtab is a symbol of survival and adventure, broken frontiers and improvised heroics. But more than all of those things, it is the seal of history.
It is strange, this conjunction of nostalgia and adventure. After all, a backpack suggests its wearer is breaking new ground. The OED dates the first reference to "knapsacks" to 1603, when the English poet Michael Drayton imagined soldiers filling them with things found in the field. Maybe that is why rucksacks are immortalised in Enid Blyton's Famous Five books (goody-goody Julian carries a style similar to Kerouac's army model). And in the statue of Edmund Hillary in Mount Cook village, New Zealand. Perhaps it also explains why Katie Holmes wore rucksacks after she left Tom Cruise.
In keeping with this sense of exploration, Herschel has bags called "Settlement", "Claim", "Little America". Rucksacks fit with the popularity of beards, hacking jackets, hiking boots, selvedge denim and Nordicalia, all of which are beloved of men in east London. (Many of the popular brands, such as Fjallraven, which has sold three million Kanken bags worldwide, and Sandqvist, are Swedish.)
"The advertising of menswear is full of metaphors for exploration," says Caroline Cox, a fashion historian. She has noticed boutiques decorated with maps; exploration motifs and accessories – hiking sticks, etc – in menswear shoots. "This whole survivalist thing is going on," she says. "All these references to rugged outdoor masculinity. The suit and tie – the guy who caused our global collapse – are our nemesis."
A backpack used to indicate a person who had time to take things in. But if you stand on Bishopsgate, at the edge of London's financial district, and ask all the men striding past when a rucksack became acceptable money-making attire, they answer over their shoulders. "In a rush." "Can't talk." "Got to get to work."
For women, there is also a high fashion motivation for adopting the rucksack, derived from the trend for luxury sportswear. Style blogger Susie Lau, AKA Susie Bubble, cites Phoebe Philo's work at Céline, which has turned even the uglier end of sportswear into luxury. "The rise of trainers and slip-ons, the Birkenstock … Certain designers are shifting our perception of chic," she says. This season, for instance, you can buy a Chanel backpack for the perception-shifting price of £2,245.
Perhaps, too, people are nostalgic for the late 1990s and 2000s, when backpacks were last in fashion. Back then, new technology began to take hold, and we were all venturing into uncharted domains on something called Internet Explorer. And why shouldn't a backpack take you there? After all, a rucksack is always looking behind you. It is built for retrospection.
Backpacks are fashion's expression of the 21st-century obsession with "the journey": with a rucksack you've never arrived, and at any moment might decide to leave. That may be why the backpack appeals to many A-listers, who once liked to arrive at airports with a heap of high-tariff luggage, and now prefer to turn up, like David Beckham or Rihanna, hauling a solitary backpack.
There is a photograph on the Herschel Supply Company website that pulls the viewer into the world of the brand. It is a landscape of Machu Picchu in Peru. Clouds cling to the mountains. Sun hits the foremost peak. It beckons the observer to step into an image that recalls the work of the German romantic painter Caspar David Friedrich, who based his work on long hiking trips. This is not a fanciful connection. Like rucksack wearers, Friedrich's figures are often seen from behind, which is why they are known as ruckenfigur. ("Rucken" means "back" in German, hence "rucksack"). "They're a device, like a bridge or a roadway," says Joseph Leo Koerner, who teaches art history at Harvard. He wrote a book on Friedrich and, as a child, used to walk beside his artist father, huge canvases strapped to his backpack.
"I am leafing through a CDF drawing book and there are knapsacks on some people. The idea of wandering, especially wandering through a beautiful natural setting, had a metaphoric meaning. We are travellers, wanderers of the world – to take on board and experience and live through that fact of being creatures in time, marching before death." With a backpack, you are always just passing through.
A rucksack turns its wearer into a ruckenfigur, the unknown person in a landscape, in communication with the forces of nature and time – even if the landscape is central London, New York or Melbourne, and the journey is the daily commute. That is because a backpack is part practical solution to an everyday problem, part escapism. It is at once egotistical and guarded, advertising an interesting life while disguising its details.
Of course, there are many kinds of storytelling. Lyndon Cormack says he and his brother came up with the idea for Herschel Supply Company because they "did not feel there was a very compelling story being told about bags". He gives examples of other brands with compelling narratives. "I love Apple computers. I love Nike. I love Converse." He mentions Charles and Ray Eames' lounge chair, which seems a long way from a Herschel backpack. "I love the storytelling nature of utilitarian product."
I'm curious to know what bag Cormack was carrying when he came up with the Herschel idea, but he doesn't know. How about when he was a child? Perhaps, like Koerner, he has a formative memory. "To tell you the truth, I can't remember."
So what is the Herschel story then?
He takes a breath, begins his retelling. "Back in 1906 my great-grandparents moved from Scotland to Canada through the homestead programme. Where my grandparents ended up settling was in a little town called Herschel, of 30 people. My grandfather grew up there. My father lived there. We as kids got to go back there all the time. Just used to wander the hills, shoot bottles, maybe the occasional gopher."
Since the last census, and the story's first telling, the population of Herschel has dwindled to "about 23", says David Neufeld, a Mennonite minister who moved there 28 years ago. Neufeld, who helped found In Ancient Echoes, an interpretive centre in the village, runs through Herschel's charms. "A very quiet place. A lot of songbirds. We have quite a collection of ancient salt sea fossils. Very good productive soil." There may also be the odd Herschel rucksack: the company donated some to a silent auction held to commemorate the village's centenary.
"Actually, they contacted us for some background material on Herschel," Neufeld says. Perhaps they needed to, to tell their story better.
There is nothing new in brands creating heritage, claiming a name, a title for their story. After all, the villagers of Herschel did exactly that, in 1911. "Perhaps because of the magnificent, clear skies," Neufeld says, "the early Anglo-Saxon settlers named it after the Herschel family of astronomers."
It's a big story to telescope into one bag. But that's the thing about rucksacks. You can pack a lot into a small space.
One is a blunt northern retail patriarch and the other a pile-it-high-sell-it-cheap southerner, but investors might do well to consider the similarities between Sir Ken Morrison, former supermarket boss, and Mike Ashley of Sports Direct.
Ten years ago, Sir Ken was the highly confident leader of a thriving grocery empire he had built up from a handful of shops owned by his dad. Investors loved him because he had delivered strong profit and sales growth for years. Even today, rival supermarket bosses talk about how his legendary attention to detail and in-depth knowledge of food supply chains made Morrisons a regional powerhouse and national brand.
Given the continuously improving profits, shareholders were happy to overlook worries about corporate governance. Morrison was scathing about non-executive directors – he said he could get a couple of "shop girls" for the price of one part-time non-exec and the girls would be more useful. Shareholders viewed Sir Ken's dominance of the boardroom as something of a charming quirk. It was only when he took over Safeway and the business descended into financial chaos that investors woke up to the fact that the boardroom had been seriously understaffed.
Without a strong board to challenge and advise, Sir Ken made a series of mis-steps which are arguably still affecting Morrisons today. He lacked the right kind of firm support just when he most needed it. That legacy has combined with later management errors and omissions to put Morrisons in the position it is today – badly battered and playing catch-up with rivals, its shares back at 2005 levels.
One wonders if any lessons have been learned from that experience. Ashley is a super-smart entrepreneur who has built an international business from one store and turned himself into a multibillionaire in the process. Sports Direct's shares have soared as he has delivered years of strong sales and profits growth, with the company benefiting from his attention to detail and in-depth knowledge of the sports fashion supply chain.
Just as at Morrisons, shareholders have been happy to allow him free rein, unchecked by any robustly independent non-executive directors. Last week, after shareholders had three times refused to vote through a £70m incentive scheme for Ashley, a new plan was finally approved. Sports Direct says it got the nod thanks to tougher performance conditions and extension of the incentive scheme from two years to four. But Ashley's payout could actually now be more than £70m – the company isn't saying and the likelihood is that they voted it through 60%-40% because at the fourth go the company linked Ashley's payout to that of thousands of his staff: if shareholders had denied Ashley, they would also have denied those employees.
Those shareholders who stood firm are threatening to vote against chairman Keith Hellawell – former chief constable of West Yorkshire – and former Reebok executive Dave Singleton, who heads the remuneration committee. Other non-execs, such as former EU commissioner Charles McCreevy, former Blacks Leisure boss Simon Bentley and investor communications specialist Claire Jenkins, could also be in the firing line.
The shareholders who refused to say yes believe the non-execs cannot challenge 58% shareholder Ashley, cannot stand up for the minority shareholders, and would be out if they tried to. They will not be able to vote out the non-execs because Ashley has that vast stake, but there are occasions when principles are important and this September's AGM will be one of them.
The shareholders who did a U-turn on the pay plan could look at Morrisons for a lesson on where weak corporate governance can take a company.
Could lower power prices damage the government? It is a counterintuitive idea, given the way high energy bills have stolen the political agenda over the past 12 months, but low prices have dangers for ministers too. Here's why.
The Department of Energy and Climate Change (Decc) has based its strategy on a presumption that electricity costs will rise from their current level of below £50 per megawatt-hour (MWh) to a £63 per MWh – although it does try to hedge its bets by saying that in extreme cases they could be as low as £42 or as high as £81.
Certainly the narrative underlining Decc policies is that power prices will rise, hence its willingness to, say, give EDF a subsidised price – paid for by consumers – for power from the planned new Hinkley Point C nuclear plant of £92.50 per MWh, starting in 2023. But what if, as ratings agency Moody's predicted last week, power prices stay around current levels or even fall "through the end of the decade"? Aurora Energy Research has also forecast that the price of power will decline to £46 per MWh by 2020 on the back of reduced demand, more windfarms and lower gas prices.
All that should be better news for carbon emissions – and put a larger sock in the mouth of those critics who believe windfarms cannot perform or that energy efficiency is irrelevant. The latest DECC figures show 20% of all electricity was generated by wind and other renewables in the first quarter of this year.
Lower wholesale prices should pass through to lower retail bills, but are bad news for the wholesale power generators; they are already closing gas plants and refusing to build new ones. This makes the capacity payment scheme, where companies are = paid to keep their plant on standby, even more necessary – but also expensive.
Lower power prices also mean the government's new green subsidy, the Levy Control Framework, which has a limited budget, will be used up more quickly, as generators obtain larger top-up subsidies as prices decline.
The cost of energy could remain on the political agenda even if it falls.
The sentence was an easy one to miss: "Christopher was granted one-off share awards (not performance-based) of 350,000 shares in December 2010 and 1,000,000 shares in July 2013. These will vest between 2015 and 2018." This was on page 104 of the Burberry annual report, and the Christopher in question is Bailey, the new boss of the luxury fashion house, who is also its chief creative officer.
The 1m shares the Yorkshireman was handed a year ago are worth £15 or so each. Shareholders can only guess why Bailey – who at the time only had one job, of chief creative – received the shares, as the annual report gives no explanation for such generosity.
As it is, Bailey is on a peculiar pay package: he gets £440,0000 of cash allowances on top of a £1.1m salary and cash bonus of up to £2.2m. On his promotion to chief executive (replacing Angela Ahrendts) he was handed a further 500,000 shares.
Unless shareholders have been given, in private, a convincing explanation for this, they should vote against the Burberry remuneration report at Friday's annual meeting.
John Michael Ingram, who has died aged 83, was the least flamboyant of the designers who created the male peacockry of 1960s England. The founder of the John Michael shop (originally on Kings Road, Chelsea) and menswear label, he never cared for the Carnaby Street carnival. His discreet, refined style made him the designer of choice for mods, who protected their precious John Michael threads with their parkas.
Ingram was a fashion lifer. His parents owned Wakeford's, a women's clothing shop for debutantes and their mothers on Kings Road, which in the postwar years was otherwise arid of fashion. He left school at 16, had no training, and later said he was in "a complete and utter fog of ignorance, but not bogged down by conventional thought" when he began to work as a buyer. From the start he was interested in the sources of textiles and insistent on brand identity: even the smallest batch of garments had to be emphatically labelled with the Wakeford's name.
Mary Quant, who opened her Chelsea boutique Bazaar in 1955, knew Ingram just as "the boy" at Wakeford's, and was surprised when, in 1957, he opened his own tiny shop five minutes' walk from her, selling men's shirts in unusual fabrics – sheer Swiss voile and gingham, for instance, in bright tints and prints – inspired by the new Italian menswear, which was aimed squarely at the young.
At that time, the sharpest menswear in London was sold in Soho. Ingram appreciated shops, such as Cecil Gee in Shaftesbury Avenue, that imported the American and Italian styles, or copied them, but he felt they were louche: "Cecil Gee was fun and important, but basically bad taste. I tried to get the same excitement but without the vulgarity." He was similarly dismissive of John Stephen, the entrepreneur who colonised Carnaby Street: "Carnaby took what I had done and popularised it," he said. He considered the Carnaby Street phenomenon to be about social revolution rather than fashion.
Nevertheless, Ingram soon opened Sportique, his own Soho shop, "crystallising what people wanted". It was situated right next to the 2i's coffee bar in Old Compton Street, a music venue that became known as the birthplace of British rock'n'roll. The decor of the shop was classy but not fusty, and the stock, recalled one customer, was "slick and trendy": hipster trousers; short, narrow, side-vented jackets; fine-fibred knitwear; non-utilitarian ties.
Sportique attracted an artistic clientele, including, over the next decade, Francis Bacon, David Hockney, Marc Bolan, Bob Dylan, the members of the Who, and the Beatles, who bought black polonecks there – although not Malcolm McLaren, who thought it "a bit too subversive". Alan Bennett described first meeting Peter Cook in 1960, and finding him dressed entirely by Sportique: shortie raincoat, bum-freezer jacket and winklepickers. (Cook then dragged Bennett along to the shop, but failed to convince him to shed his tweeds.)
Young professionals followed in the footsteps of the creative set. Ingram expanded during the 60s to a bigger shop in Kings Road, and to Bond Street, St Ann's Arcade in Manchester and other upmarket locations. He began to attract a clientele he had not expected: working-class teens. He had no plans to attract mods, but they came anyway, because they shared Ingram's preoccupation with quality fabric and tailoring. He was surprised and pleased that 16-year-olds saved for months to buy a John Michael suit. (He was less happy with the huge shoplifting problem.)
Jack English, who sourced the vintage costumes for the nostalgic 1979 mod film Quadrophenia said: " There were only about 300 guys in the whole of London who could then afford authentic mod suits, and … we located this wonderful genuine silk John Michael exclusive." It was later wrecked by seawater when they were filming the Brighton beach riot scene.
The John Michael company went public in 1965, by which time its head office was in Savile Row, where Ingram set up a formal, if larky, tailoring business (his double-breasted "spirit of old Broadcasting House" suit for Roy Strong, now in the V&A, is a witty example). He had 17 shops, and exported to the US (with Quant, he represented swinging London in the then-smart JC Penney stores), Japan and Europe. He also consulted for major manufacturers, and, having been solely responsible for the look of his clothes, shops and packaging, began to employ talented newcomers – Tom Gilbey (later to be a Savile Row tailor) as designer, Jeremy Hackett (later founder of the menswear label Hackett London) as salesman. At its high point – when Ingram had the Savile Row premises rebuilt with bronze mirrors and white carpets after a 1971 fire – the business also encompassed branches of his Guys and Dolls shops, and of Westerner, a pioneering chain selling jeans.
With massive increases in the prices of raw materials during the mid-1970s recession, the retail clothing business changed structure, and Ingram's style, which prioritised the garments over the promotion (he preferred word-of-mouth publicity), went out of fashion. The chains, the stores and the tailoring business closed, and Ingram transferred his considerable knowledge to fashion forecasting. He founded the Design Intelligence Forecasting Agency in 1979, for many years publishing reliable guides to trends based on his hands-on feel for the actual materials. Until he was 81, he went daily to his office.
He is survived by his wife, Sonia, and their children, Guy and Tamara.
Several weeks ago a story appeared in the South Wales Evening Post about a shopper who found a label stitched into her Primark dress: "Forced to work exhausting hours". While it may have been a hoax, the horror felt by the shopper spread, more labels were found, and the story became a national concern that has tied the Primark PR department up in knots.
So what is to be made of these labels that Primark assert were sewn onto its clothes in the UK? Why have they been interpreted as the long lost voice of Bangladeshi garment workers? And what is wrong with seeing them as a cry for help to which we must urgently respond?
The National Garment Workers Federation (NGWF) is the largest trade union federation in Bangladesh's garment sector. It is currently campaigning to end inhumanely long hours and overtime. The label correctly states that workers in garment factories in Bangladesh work exhaustingly long hours. While by law there is a limit of eight hours plus two hours of overtime, workers routinely work 14 hours a day. Other campaigns being fought are for safe working conditions, maternity leave, child care centres in factories, adequate housing and for a living wage (workers currently get €53 a month, or €68 for more skilled workers).
The overarching priority for the NGWF is, however, the organisation and unionisation of workers. President of the NGWF, Amir-ul-Haque Amin says: "We believe that trade unions in factories are the main tool for workers to bargain with management for better working conditions, better wages and to ensure safe workplaces."
Unionising the Bangladeshi garment industry is a tough job. Out of four million garment workers only about 7% are currently unionised. It is also particularly tough to unionise an 85% female workforce in a heavily male dominated society where women remain marginalised and often uneducated and where intimidation techniques by factory bosses include sexual harassment, violence and sackings.
Because of this the NGWF is running special leadership development programmes for women so that they can lead the organising process themselves. "Day by day the participation of young women inside trade unions is growing," says Amirul Haque Amin. "At present many young women are in leadership roles – at the factory level and at the federation level."
But where is this narrative in the furore sparked by Labelgate? Why instead have there just been numerous hand-wringing articles focusing on consumerism, blaming low income shoppers for the evils of multinational corporations, and the victimhood of garment workers?
The mystery Primark labels are a far more acceptable narrative than trade unionism because they fit the tedious stereotype of Asian women – helpless, passive and in need of saving by western people. A label sewn into a dress is like a message in a bottle – it has the prerequisite eastern mysticism, voices from a distant land and a quest to save mysterious, helpless women.
Bangladeshi garment workers are neither mysterious nor in need of saving. Journalists and consumer organisations should call up the NGWF offices in Dhaka and get the organisation's opinion on the Bangladeshi garment industry. On Tuesday no one other than I had contacted the NGWF about the Primark labels. Their opinion is that poor pay and conditions are not unique to one brand (Primark) but rather "applicable to almost all the brands that are sourcing from Bangladesh."
The NGWF is also clear that it does not want to see the destruction of the industry through consumer boycotts as there are no other job opportunities for the four million women working in those factories.
They do however want people to work with them to pressure corporations into raising pay and conditions. "People in the UK should ask brands like Primark, Marks & Spencer, Edinburgh Woollen Mill, or New Look – about the reality of their supply chain," says Amin. "They should pressure brands to disclose their suppliers and to sign the Bangladesh accord, and to ensure a fair price of Bangladeshi garments and pay a living wage to garment workers."
Pressure groups like War on Want and Labour Behind the Label are helping workers. But other consumer groups should also contact NGWF to discuss how they could help.
In the 1990's, to guard against patronising or victimising garment workers, the United Students Against Sweatshops (USAS) adopted as its motto a few lines taken from Lilla Watson of the Aboriginal Activists Group in Queensland, Australia in the 1970's: "If you have come to help me you are wasting your time. But if you've come because your liberation is bound up with mine, then let us work together."
Progressive change in Bangladesh depends on millions of young women taking on some of the world's most repressive institutions and corporations. They are already engaged in this fight and we can work with them. What we must not do is silence their agency and their role in history by reducing them to a passive cry for help.
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
When Primark opens its first US store next year, it will be with the help of an army of its European fans. The cheap fashion chain doesn't have an online shop, and doesn't advertise. Instead, Primark will use its own shoppers to help sell the brand to fellow fashion lovers by posting photographs of themselves wearing their latest purchases on Primania, the company's new social media site. Less than a year old, Primania now gets 300,000 visitors a week. Shoppers' comments, often complete with the price tag, are translated into six languages to reflect the group's spread across Europe.
Like several other high-street names, the brand is blurring the lines between publishing, shopping and social media in a bid to get closer to its customers.
Primania is a simpler version of online fashion retailer Asos's Fashion Finder, which runs magazine-style features – a recent one was "What to wear for your graduation" – and has 160,000 registered users. Both supply a constant stream of street-fashion trends, styling ideas and fun photos to their own editorial teams, who then mix shoppers' ideas and selfies with fashion tips, new product information and other content.
Asos also publishes a glossy magazine with circulation of 470,000 – more than Glamour, Grazia or even the giveaway Stylist. A digital version, available in French and German, and in US and Australian editions, goes to another 100,000 shoppers. More than 30 staff at Asos's headquarters work on editorial content, and there are editors in each international territory the digital magazine hits.
John Bason, finance director of Primark's parent company, Associated British Foods, says: "Showing off your bargains is a characteristic of Primark shopping. Before social media was big it was all word of mouth – people saying, 'I like your outfit. Where did you get it?' That helped Primark grow. With social media, word of mouth is increasingly powerful."
Primania, he says, took inspiration from other social media sites, like the Primark Haul videos of Youtube blogger Zoella, which can attract more than a million viewers. "Primania is owned by Primark consumers and it's crucial that it's customer-led. Part of the pull of the brand is that it is something 'owned by me'," says BasonAlice Spencer of consultantcy Brand Union says shopping is no longer just about buying, but lifestyle: "Post-recession consumers want to hear (from) brands. They want to know what they think, where they stand and what their beliefs are. In a digital world, people no longer go into a shop, see something and decide to buy it. It is much more about buying into a lifestyle."
With more than half of female consumers now starting each fashion shopping trip via a smartphone or tablet computer, eye-catching content generates sales. That content might be exclusive footage of favoured bands, celebrity interviews, "how-to" guides or fashion tips. The aim is to become the shoppers' friend, interested in everything they love, whether it's in stock or not.
Asos editorial director Melissa Dick, who used to be online editor of women's magazine Elle, says she left traditional mags because she realised they weren't keeping up with the way young women consumed information on lifestyle and fashion.
For young women, she says, magazines "aren't democratic or collaborative enough. There has to be more dialogue. You can't just broadcast as message; women want to check out how their peers are dressing or behaving, and find their views and reviews of an item."
Asos, she says, is even experimenting with using shoppers' pictures instead of model shots to illustrate some products in the transactional part of the site.
Shoppers also wanted to be able to buy what they saw with a couple of clicks, share their opinions and generally be part of the action. They wanted original information, ideas or pictures that could be shared with their friends. "Young women are on social media every 30 seconds," says Dick. "We are giving them content they can share, and increase their social currency."
Upmarket online fashion store Net-A-Porter is also trying publishing to bring in sales with Porter, a bi-monthly glossy magazine which shoppers can scan using a smartphone app to link to the shopping site. Not everything in the magazine is available on the Net-A-Porter website, but the firm promises to help shoppers find a way to buy most items, with links to brands' own websites or a concierge service.
Magazines and newspapers are trying to fight back, however. Grazia has launched an iPad app which readers can use to buy featured products, and Vogue owner Condé Nast has also been experimenting with shoppable websites.
Some of the biggest high-street retailers – Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury's, Waitrose and John Lewis – are old hands in the magazine business, but even they are making efforts to reach out to customers. Waitrose now has a TV channel on its website, with cooking ideas, "how-to" videos, celebrity interviews and cookery demos by famous chefs. Online recipes from TV shows can be quickly converted into a shopping list of items that can be bought online.
Marks & Spencer has added a style and living section to its website, offering magazine-style content including editors' product picks, trend suggestions and celebrity interviews. It has hired new staff, including former Times and Financial Times fashion writer Nicola Copping, and the 20-strong team includes specialist editors for categories such as beauty and womenswear.
Some say the new-look M&S website is more a hindrance that a help to its shoppers – mainly older women, who might be more focused on making purchases than the twentysomethings of Asos or Primark. Sales growth through the website has not been good, although marketing director Patrick Bousquet Chavanne says style and living is the fastest-growing section of the website and accounts for close to half its traffic. He says shoppers are 24% more likely to make a purchase if they've read about it.
Dick reckons all retailers will have to adapt to the new world of digital sharing: "For a shop to become a brand, it has to have a relationship with its customers – and the best way to do that is through other customers."
We were always so busy and excited by all the difficult things that they just happened and we overcame them one by one. In retrospect, one of the hardest things is to make sure you get your pricing right, including your time – which, as it happens, is all completely taken up if you do your own business. Making sure you love what you do is imperative.
Rosie and I are like two sides of one coin. We met at college, we worked together, we did everything together. We dressed the same, liked the same music and both loved making things. Now we have grown into ourselves and had to focus on our strengths to get the most out of our time.
I can't believe Tatty Devine turns 15 this September – the years have flown by and there have been so many amazing times. Last year, out of the blue, Rosie and I were awarded MBEs. What with all the outfit-choosing and planning where to have lunch afterwards it was a bit like we got married. My parents nearly burst. They have always let me do my own thing and have always helped and supported me so it meant a lot to see them beaming.
Now, I often wake up in the middle of the night with an idea for something but when we started Tatty Devine it was not a classic lightbulb moment.
Rosie and I started to make things together for fun. It was all about fun. We sparked off each other and we could make things happen. The beginning was a rollercoaster ride from market stalls to London Fashion Week, from making things from finds in the street to our designs being shot for the millennium issue of Vogue. The whole thing was more like diving in at the deep end.
We had no set plan to go into the fashion world. We both studied fine art at Chelsea so making jewellery felt a bit like a continuation of the practice we had started there. I used to sneakily read Vogue for fun when I was meant to be reading Kant After Duchamp and the like. We didn't have a plan, we thought we might do jewellery for a year, then make zines, then be in a band, and then whatever else we could dream up. We had so much momentum at the start we just crashed into the fashion world head first.
Tatty Devine is laser cut acrylic. When we first started we made things from found objects, but as we grew we ran out of cake decorations and dart flights so were on the lookout for something that we could control ourselves. The really exciting moment happened when we went on a trip to New York and discovered a whole street of sign makers. They were selling little acrylic shapes for bars and shops to create signs with but we knew straight away this had got to be jewellery. Back in London we found a model maker who had a laser cutter who could do it for us.
Fifteen years later and acrylic is still exciting as I have built up such an extensive knowledge on how I can control it and push it into whatever I want it to be. It allows us the freedom to create crazy one-offs and we can keep all our production in Britain.
My mobile phone keeps me awake. I don't have it by my bed any more or I just check my emails and Facebook too much.
I can't sleep in, I have never been good at lie-ins. If I wake up at 4am chances are I will plan entire lines of new jewellery or play out the whole day ahead in my mind, then fall asleep again at five to seven and not want to wake up.
Something inside just craves making things, new things that don't exist yet. I fire off Rosie and we get excited and I go off like a rocket with more ideas for fun things.
I have been so lucky to work with some amazing people over the past 15 years but my dear friend Rob Ryan is a constant source of inspiration to me, in both his work and the way he runs his business. We recently collaborated on a fine jewellery collection in gold and silver, which will always have a special place in my heart.
As creative director I wish I spent more of my time creating new jewellery, but being part of a team running Tatty Devine keeps me pretty busy. I design around 300 pieces a year and some weeks I do nothing but invent new things, but then other weeks I meet with new possible collaborators, create photo shoots, have meetings with stores, design pop-up shops. That is what is so exciting, I never know what will happen next.
In the spotlight… Jo Fairley from Green & Black's
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
It seems so unlikely as to be incredible: a cry for help sewn into a Primark dress. First one, now two Swansea shoppers have come forward and told the South Wales Evening Post that they found extra labels sewn into items bought last year. "Forced to work exhausting hours" read the first; "Degrading sweatshop conditions" says the latest, pictured in the 25 June edition of the paper.
Primark has promised to investigate, and may hope the labels will turn out to be a hoax. Perhaps they are a new form of direct action, carried out with a needle in the changing rooms – or even by a mole on the inside?
But two months after the anniversary of the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh, when most of those injured and bereaved by the disaster are still waiting for compensation – though Primark, unlike other retailers who have admitted to a presence in the factory, has contributed to the compensation fund – the secret message hidden inside a piece of women's clothing is a startling image. Could a garment worker somewhere in the developing world really reach across the heads of managers, unions, manufacturers, governments, western multinationals and shopfloors into the wardrobe of an ordinary shopper, to make a complaint? And if so, what do they want us to do about it?
Improve their working conditions, is the obvious answer. But how? One anonymous senior executive from a big high street retailer recently told the Guardian that shoppers "don't care" about conditions, and research shows most "prefer inexpensive over respect for human rights". If consumers were more bothered about workers, goes this argument, the industry would progress.
Campaigners, including the designer Katharine Hamnett, call this a cop-out. Differences between retailers are proof that they, too, drive change. European brands have gone further than those in the US in their support for Bangladeshi trade unions in the aftermath of the Rana Plaza catastrophe, though Matalan and Benetton have yet to make any contribution to the compensation fund despite admitting links with the factory.
But it is true that the rise of ethical shopping, or what US sociologist Juliet Schor calls "conscious consumption", has made limited headway in fashion. It is possible to choose free-range over factory-produced eggs even in convenience stores; much harder to opt to pay a premium of a couple of pounds for a T-shirt that comes with ethical plus points.
In part this is down to the sheer complexity of the fashion supply chain. Perhaps the most poignant and ironic thing about the message in a Primark dress, is that as far away as the machine operators in the stitch-and-sew factories of Bangladesh and elsewhere might appear, they are far closer to us than most of the other millions of people involved in making our clothes.
Thanks in part to the publicity surrounding the Rana Plaza disaster, we can at least imagine the men and women who sew them. But before a cotton dress is cut and stitched it is dyed and printed; before that it is woven from yarn into cloth; before that it is spun from raw cotton into yarn. And before that it is planted, picked, and ginned (or cleaned). Cotton is an agricultural commodity and the world's most important non-food crop, grown on all five continents and by some of the poorest people in the world.
Long before we got to meet Dorset fishermen at the farmer's market, stories about where food comes from was part of the story advertisers told us. Think of the man from Del Monte, or the cows on Ben & Jerry's ice-cream. People like to see the name of the farmer who grew their carrots on the supermarket packaging, and picture pigs in fields rather than crates.
Fashion simply can't deliver this kick, or not without tremendous efforts on the parts of specialists such as Bruno Pieters, whose recently launched Honest By label provides details of exactly where and how each item was made. The story of textile production is the story of industrialisation, of thrilling technological innovation in the north of England. But it is also the story of slavery and the destruction of textile manufacturing in India, as Ian Jack wrote last week. It's no wonder this cry of rage from a garment factory, whoever put it there, pricks our consciences. Even if we can hardly begin to understand why.
Fashion retailer Jane Norman is to disappear from the high street after its owner put it into administration.
The UK brand has had financial problems in the past with its current owner, Edinburgh Woollen Mill, buying a pared down version of the chain out of administration in 2011.
In a statement confirming the appointment of a restructuring firm Grant Thornton, the company said it was "no longer able to continue to support its loss-making UK and Ireland retail stores". It said the 24-store chain had been placed in administration in a move that puts 157 jobs at risk.
"Like many retailers, we have seen extremely challenging conditions on the high street for several years in what is a very competitive sector in young fashion," said the company. "While we have made every effort for a number of years to makes those stores work, that part of the business is no longer viable."
Jane Norman employs 57 full time staff and about 100 part-time. "We intend to continue trading the stores for as long as possible with a view to achieving the best outcome for all concerned, in particular those people based in the stores," said Grant Thornton partner Les Ross. "It is likely, however, that store closures are inevitable."
The brand will not be axed altogether. Edinburgh Woollen Mill, which also owns Peacocks, intends to sell its clothing online and in department stores overseas. "We fundamentally believe in the Jane Norman brand and its future as a web and international concessions business," it said. "For that reason we have taken the difficult decision to restructure the business to focus on future opportunities."
With a cream leather lounger strategically placed under a map of the world labelled "the world is ours", the Manchester office of Boohoo founder Mahmud Kamani has the menace of a Bond villain's lair.
Kamani and his business partner Carol Kane are indeed plotting world domination but their weapon of choice is fashion website boohoo.com. With its £8 maxi dresses and £12 jeans the retailer is giving Primark a run for its money as its targets fashion-hungry 16- to 24-year-olds with limited finances.
"The map doesn't need dots," explains Kamani. "We're going to get everywhere." For many years Boohoo had been quietly going about its business in a rundown former mill. But the Kamani family sacrificed anonymity in March when they pressed the button on a stock market listing that earned them a fortune – and a large amount of scrutiny from potential investors.
The retailer has an impressive track record, having gone from a standing start in 2007 to profits of nearly £11m from sales of £110m in the year to the end of February. It has just completed the first of several phases of expansion planned for its Burnley warehouses, which will eventually be able to handle sales of £1bn. So far so Asos, the fast-growing fashion website, which until recently was a stock market darling.
After running a private business for decades, becoming a stock market pawn can be a shock for entrepreneurs used to doing what they think is best. Kamani is a refreshingly straight talker and reportedly told analysts at a recent meeting that Boohoo's mobile website was "shit". He is coy when asked about it and his PR offers that "it is being upgraded".
The listing has been a baptism of fire for the senior team, including Kamani's brother Jalal, who is trading director. After debuting at 50p the shares soared to 85p but are now back just below the offer price.
The company's office has the air of a start-up, with crowded banks of desks in every room, shabby paintwork and trendy twentysomethings running around looking busy. In the foyer a man is sorting hangers into giant cardboard boxes. With more than 500 staff the company has outgrown the warren and has just bought another building around the corner.
The IPO reaped £240m for the family and board members, but the pair have not been on a shopping spree. Kamani has a Rolls-Royce Phantom parked outside and Kane drives a shiny tank-like Land Rover, but they are not new. And although Kane is doing up an old house in Staffordshire she jokes it "would be nice to have a bathroom".
Indeed Kamani labours the point that Boohoo is not an overnight success but the culmination of decades of graft. "This is not an eight-year story; this is a family business that's been going for 30 years."
A key figure is Mahmud's elderly father Abdullah, who escaped war-torn Kenya in the 60s to start a new life in the north-west with his wife and four children. Abdullah's first venture was selling handbags on a market stall, but he went on to found what would become a successful family textile business, supplying high street names such as New Look and Primark, before he focused on Boohoo.
"It was a case of rags to riches for my dad," explains Kamani. "He bought his first Rolls-Royce 30 years ago and let my eldest brother Jalal drive it out of the garage. He adds: "My father is 80 and comes into work every day."
Kamani appears to have inherited his father's work ethic and is either on the phone or looking at messages on one of his two handsets when the conversation lulls. He is momentarily distracted by an email and elbows Kane. It turns out that the latest sales figures have come through and he is surprised how good they are. She quickly explains that a promotion has just kicked in.
"People have invested in us and that's an honour," he continues. "We work hard. We worked hard when we were on the market stalls; we work hard now. It's what we've always done. I don't have another hobby or life. I want to walk into my office an old man."
After proving useful in the runup to the flotation, the comparison with Asos stopped being favourable earlier this month, when Asos blamed the strong pound and heavy discounting for a massive profit warning. The alert spooked investors, wiping as much as 40% off Asos's share price on the day and pulling Boohoo down with it.
It has led to a dramatic reappraisal of Asos's prospects, with Morgan Stanley analyst Anisha Singhai slashing her price for the stock from £40 to £25. (Asos suffered a further setback this weekend when a fire at its Barnsley warehouse forced it to stop taking orders.) On the surface the fashion websites have a lot in common, but there are key differences. While Asos carries 75,000 products, including 1,000 third-party brands, Boohoo stocks just 9,000 of its own clothing lines.
Kane, who is co-chief executive of the listed group, says the focus on own-brand is key. "We're in full control of our pricing structure all the way through," she says. "If you want to promote your own brand you haven't got any restrictions."
After working together for more than 20 years – Kane set up its design team in 1993 – the co-chief executives are prone to interrupting each other. "Any business doing international trade will have challenges on foreign exchange," continues Kamani. "But we only sell Boohoo, so we command the price."
Unusually Boohoo buys very small quantities of stock, 300-500 pieces at a time, with one in four orders then repeated. "Because this is an e-commerce business you've got to be fresh all the time," says Kane. "A traditional retailer might buy three or four styles but we'll buy 25. That way we've covered off the overall volume required and the one that really works we'll get back into."
At the moment Boohoo has seven major markets, including the UK, US and France, although it ships to more than 100. Despite the breakneck growth of recent years the cream lounger still looks pristine. Kamani says he never uses it for brainstorming sessions. "Once I was really tired and actually laid on it and tried to rest," he says. "But every fucker kept walking through the door because I always say my door's open."
The textile and clothing industry is the second largest employer after agriculture in the developing world, and a large percentage of this workforce are women. Research shows that empowering and investing in women has a cumulative bonus: women are likely to spend their income on their children and families, on education, health and nutrition, bringing long term positive change and prosperity to communities.
There are numerous fashion brands making a strong social impact but restricted to their local markets. Because I am aware of the role that fashion plays in our lives and the lives of those that create it, I decided to support these brands and bring them to a global mainstream market via the online boutique Fashion ComPassion.
As of April, more than 53,000 Palestine refugees from Syria were seeking safety and shelter from the continuing conflict in Lebanon. One of the first brands Fashion ComPassion partnered was Palestyle, a brand providing jobs and an income to Palestinian refugee women in camps in Lebanon and Jordan.
With a vision of becoming a leading accessory brand in the Middle East, Fashion ComPassion worked as its retailer, agent and distributor, helping to build its market in Pakistan and securing its stock in the British Museum. Palestyle started with a small team of 20 women who used their skills and craftsmanship to add traditional embroidery and designs to fashion pieces, and today works with 100 women, investing in community projects such as the Water Tank Exchange Program, which has provided clean water to over 4,000 refugees.
Rags2Riches is another brand creating positive change through fashion, working with women in Payatas, one of the poorest parts of the Philippine capital. According to the Payatas Poverty Alleviation Foundation, almost 40% of the active population are unemployed and nearly half are earning less than 4,000 Philippine pesos ($100) a month.
Many women living in Payatas were part of the cottage industry of rug weavers controlled by middle men, leaving them with minimal money for the work they created. Rags2Riches was created to give these skilled women fair access to the market. It has formed a partnership with well known Filipino designers who have transformed the scrap material into high-end fashion accessories. In three years, the brand has supported more than 400 women (pdf) , upcycled more than 500 tons of scrap cloth, and increased the earning potential of artisans from less than $0.02 per day to more than $10 per day.
In Rwanda, Indego Africa is working with women to support them through economic empowerment and education. This summer it is launching a leadership academy in Kigali that will provide business training for 100 emerging artisan leaders over the next two years. Indego Africa has taken the work of its artisans to a global level by partnering with the likes of J. Crew, Eileen Fisher, TOMS and Nicole Miller.
Another social enterprise, Sougha, was established by the Khalifa Fund in the United Arab Emirates to preserve and promote the traditions of women emirati artisans. Sougha creates economic opportunities for isolated local communities by reviving their skills and connecting them to new markets. Due to religious and cultural restrictions, the women don't have access to the outside work, so the Sougha team visits these artisans, refines their products and sells them to a global market.
As an online retailer the social impact of Fashion ComPassion is not limited to just providing a platform for socially responsible brands. It also creates awareness around sustainability, and supports girls' education through its partnership with the United Nations World Food Program , which provides school meals and take-home rations as an incentive for poor families to send their daughters to school, while giving girls the nutrients they need to focus in class.
Ethical fashion companies do not have to compete with big retailers; they are different and can grow alongside them. Since the Rana Plaza factory collapse, steps have been taken by bigger brands to look into transparency, code of conduct, working conditions and wages. Retailers cannot afford another such disaster to happen, and checks are being introduced to ensure better standards. The bigger players will always dictate the fashion landscape but small retailers can also have a profound impact on the industry.
As consumers, we need to assess our needs, desires and the part we play in the cycle of consumption. Fashion has the power to bring positive change to the most disadvantaged women around the world, but it is only with the support of us all that the sustainable fashion industry can boom and grow.
Ayesha Mustafa is founder and director of Fashion ComPassion, an online sustainable fashion retailer providing a platform and market to socially responsible brands from developing countries
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
The other day, I woke up to find several sexually explicit photos of myself in my inbox. Some of them showed me doing things I'd already written about in the widely quoted account of my encounter with photographer Terry Richardson at age 19. Others showed me doing things of which I had – and have – no memory at all. My body language is stiff, but a close reading of my face reveals nothing, even to me. The lights are on, but no one's home.
I have two different haircuts.
"Please let me know if it is indeed you, and if so, whether you think it's two occasions and you forgot, or what," New York Magazine reporter Benjamin Wallace wrote in the email.
This was not entirely unexpected. A little while before that, I came across a photo of Richardson reaching out to grab my breast. It jogged a vague memory of "Uncle Terry" groping me without asking – something I was always terrified would happen when I was modeling for Guys With Cameras – but which I didn't precisely recall happening in the shoot I wrote about. It made me wonder what else I wasn't remembering.
It was not a very good feeling to have, least of all when I'd already spoken at length about my experience in the belief that I was telling the absolute truth. I worried what conclusions Wallace would draw for his readers. My conclusions would, I figured, be somewhat different: trauma – particularly sexual trauma – affects memory, often in ways that allow predators to traumatize their victims while simultaneously rendering them unreliable witnesses to their own lives.
On Monday morning, instead of pictures, I woke up to Wallace's cover story, "Is Terry Richardson an Artist or a Predator?" Is that supposed to be a trick question?
From Roman Polanski to Woody Allen and thousands of "nice guys" in between, it should be obvious by now that artists and predators aren't mutually exclusive. Sexual predators aren't drooling monsters that hide in caves: they are husbands, fathers, employees, friends and, yes, sometimes artists. Why is this so hard for some people to understand?
But figuring the headline might have been written by an editor looking to titillate, I read on.
In more than 7,000 words, the false dichotomy of the headline is never directly addressed – despite all the words the article spends illuminating Richardson's glamorous-but-messed-up childhood, his nepotistic career arc and what various people think of his "provocative" work. Call me crazy, but allegations of sexual harassment and abuse are a little more important than what type of sandwich Uncle Terry likes to eat in the morning.
It treats the central question of Richardson's many critics – Was meaningful consent given for the sex acts in these images? – in a cursory fashion, given that it's the theme this major magazine article promises to explore. It isn't as though the author lacked for material: Wallace and I spoke for over an hour, and the only quote he used from me was in regard to the aforementioned images.
Stories from other people were treated similarly: brief points about their accusations accompanied by parenthetical denials from Richardson's camp. Charlotte Waters's story of assault was mentioned, but accompanied by the "mitigating" mention that she referred to herself as a pervert in an introductory email – almost as though that was a green light for whatever. Sena Cech released a statement about how her story was mischaracterized by Wallace.
As someone morbidly interested in the psychology of criminals and sociopaths – as well as the banal ways abuse weaves itself into our lives from generation to generation – I'll admit that I was able to dissociate myself enough to find the New York Magazine story an enthralling read in much the same way that I devoured the book Devil in the White City or the killer Eliot Rodger's lengthy manifesto. It offers detailed, socially-understandable explanations for Richardson's behavior: his unconventional and even traumatic childhood; his lack of empathy; his seemingly limited understanding of how coercion works; and all the people who enabled him to continue to operate.
There's even some mention of the power structures that keep Richardson insulated from the consequences of his actions, including the fact that agents send models to him and they feel, in the model Sarah Ziff's words, "pressured to comply because my agent had told me to make a good impression". (Ziff, in the years since, co-founded the labor organization Model Alliance to address the systemic problems that make young models vulnerable to both Richardsons and an economically exploitative system.)
Wallace does a good job describing the – if I'm being generous – willful naïveté that Richardson exhibits about his own "work". But his pose is undermined by the apparently savvy way he chooses "collaborators" for his more explicit work. "Kate Moss wasn't asked to grab a hard dick," said one anonymous photo agent – the first real nod to false sense of choice with which Richardson apparently presented his no-name models.
But, even the moments of clarity about the exploitative nature of the system in which Richardson has operated are surrounded by quotes from his "yes men" and women – one of whom is his girlfriend, although that's not mentioned – sounding as defensive and delusional as you'd expect.
After reading more about Uncle Terry's fucked-up childhood, I have to wonder: is the more important question How did he get this way?, or rather How do we stop him? Or is the real question even more complex:What does this say about the fashion industry as a whole that so many people have let him and other, sneakier people get away with this for so long? Would we really be having this conversation if Uncle Terry were just another abusive uncle and/or a member of the economic underclass? Or, conversely, if he were the CEO of a corporation using his position to get blowjobs from employees?
"Art" has apparently been deemed a falsely separate realm in which neither basic labor laws nor ethics apply, so it's not surprising that an exploration of how this man makes art (and uses sex) so badly misses the point about how that art (and the commoditization of it) enables him to get away with something far less than enthusiastic consent. Yes, Terry Richardson has muddied the waters by entwining his sex life – and his sexual predation – with his work life. But it's supposed to be up to journalists to disentangle those threads and shine a light on them, not just give a thumbs-up and move on.
First there were "nan shoes", "chunky sandals" and "pool sliders". But this summer's trend for ugly shoes has spawned a footwear movement all of its own, as the Birkenstock sandal steps up again. Despite being 50 years old, vegan-friendly and politically charged – American conservatives coined the pejorative term "Birkenstock liberals" in 2004 – the German orthopaedic sandal is proving to have more fashion staying power than Kate Moss.
The distinctive cork-soled sandals, first produced by Karl Birkenstock in 1964, are selling out across UK retailers. Amazon.co.uk's shoe store reports a 95% rise in sales of all varieties of the sandals in the last few weeks, while Asos has had similar success.
"The key style for us has been the Arizona [two-strap] in black and white, which is flying out," said Hayley Beech, worldwide buyer for Asos. "We have stocked Birkenstock for several years, but they have had an amazing season on Asos for spring/summer, with a huge sales increase on last year. We have had to do multiple trade repeats this season as the demand is so high."
The shoe is also popular at the luxury end of the market. "Birkenstock has done very well this summer. The blue-and-white stripe and navy colour sold out very quickly. We bought in the red, black and white solid colours, which came in a fortnight ago and have already sold out," said Natalie Kingham, buying director at luxury online retailer Matches Fashion. "Clients are looking for summer footwear options that are more grounding, that can be worn with a summer dress but which have a bit more attitude."
Birkenstock's two-strap Arizona is the style du jour, having made an appearance in the Céline spring/summer 2013 collection in Paris.
"That silhouette was universally considered ugly," Vogue contributor Katherine Bernard told the magazine in July 2013. "But [Céline designer] Phoebe Philo's luxe reinterpretation got me thinking. It's the most comfortable sandal in the world having a stylish renaissance."
Givenchy has also produced two versions of the Arizona sandal, one floral and one metallic, retailing at £545 and £595 respectively. The original Birkenstocks, at a rather more accessible £49.95, have enjoyed knock-on success as a result of their high-end brethren.
"Have they ever come back in fashion?" asked Robert Lusk, founder of the Natural Shoe Company, which owns the Birkenstock UK flagship store in central London. "To be honest, demand is so huge this year that we can't meet it. We've got workers pulling all kinds of shifts. They've pulled out all the stops to meet demand."
There are now 800 varieties of Birkenstocks, from triple strap to the thong, and more than 12m pairs were produced for the global market this year. The London flagship store recently underwent an overhaul, transforming the 600 square feet space to include iPads to enable customers to order online should their preferred model not be available in the shop.
Like all good family dynasties, the Birkenstock clan have had their hiccups. In 2004 a "sandal war" erupted when Susanne Birkenstock, separated from her husband, Christian, began producing high-heeled sandals, called the Beautystep, using her married name. "Beautystep is a nice name; I hope she sells a lot of product," Christian told the Guardian in 2005.
"The only problem is she has to leave the name Birkenstock off the shoes. People were telephoning our stores and saying, 'Oh, you've brought out a new range of sandals.' But we hadn't – she had. That's why we had to send letters to the shops explaining that they weren't Birkenstocks."
But the Birkenstock's longevity, usually underscored by a growth of 10-15% annually, is most notable for enjoying fashion revivals on roughly a 10-year cycle. In the 1990s the sandals became part of the Grunge aesthetic; Kate Moss wore a white pair of Arizona Birkenstocks in the now-infamous Corrine Day photoshoot for the Face magazine in 1990.
In the early 2000s, the style was reprised once again by a number of celebrities – a Guardian article from 2003 mentions Jude Law, Jade Jagger and Gwyneth Paltrow as wearers.
Lusk is philosophical about the Arizona design being replicated by other designers, not least because it has had a dramatic effect on sales of the original. "The two-strap Arizona silhouette is universally known, it's an iconic design. I was in Italy a few years ago buying a motorbike and I met this wonderful Italian family.
"The women asked what I did and I explained. Her husband asked her to translate and she just leant over and made the pattern of the two straps across her foot, and he understood straight away. That was a nice moment."
Not bad for a German orthopedic shoe that Lusk recalls was initially met with derision. "People laughed at them at first, they thought they were funny looking. But we've got the last laugh now, as they say."
Online fashion retailer Boohoo has shrugged off comparisons with Asos by posting with a bumper set of maiden results that showed profits had more than tripled.
"We are just innocent bystanders," said Boohoo co-founder Mahmud Kamani after last week's massive profit warning by Asos hit confidence in internet retailers with 9% wiped off the Boohoo share price on the day. "We don't compare ourselves with anybody. The share price moves with market sentiment."
The Manchester-based company has been on a rollercoaster ride since it joined London's junior market in March. After listing at 50p the shares soared to 85p, but have since fallen back.
Last Thursday more than a third was wiped of Asos's market value after it warned the strong pound and heavy discounting in markets such as Australia would hit profits this year. Both companies sell clothing, but Boohoo sells only its own-brand fashions and has a smaller selection, with just 9,000 styles to choose from. "Nothing has changed in the last 10 weeks," said Kamani.
The fashion retailer, which targets the 16-35 age group, was set up in 2006 by Kamani and his business partner Carol Kane. The co-chief executives previously supplied high street rivals such as Primark and New Look. Boohoo.com, which makes extensive use of social media, has been described as an online Primark.
"After all the trauma over the recent Asos profits warning, Boohoo seems to have shown it has a different business model," said independent retail analyst Nick Bubb. "Boohoo's own-label range gives it far more control than Asos apparently has over pricing and margins, and Boohoo has not needed to emulate Asos's discounting approach in Australia."
Boohoo said sales increased 63% to £110m in the year to 28 February, with pre-tax profits surging from just over £3m to nearly £11m. In the UK, its largest market, sales rose 60%. The new financial year had also started strongly with sales up 24% in the three months to 31 May. The firm has used the £50m raised at IPO to invest in its IT systems and warehouse, which has been expanded to support a turnover of £350m.
With profits coming in slightly ahead of expectations, the shares closed up nearly 10% at 50.5p.
"We view Boohoo as a brand and design-led online player with an under-rated competitive advantage in sourcing and supply chain," said Investec analyst Kate Calvert.
In the noughties, London fashion week was awash with Mulberry's distinctively shaped handbags. From the pouchy-pocketed Roxanne, wildly popular in 2004, to 2010's satchel-shaped Alexa, they were perennially tucked under the arms of fashion editors, buyers and celebrities.
Mulberry's new Tessie bags have received a more muted response. Though it's early days – the range has only been on sale for a couple of weeks – they haven't been popping up on street style blogs, nor have celebrities been conspicuously carrying them into fashion events.
Available in oak, oxblood and black – colours with truly broad appeal – the Tessie range is inspired by classics from the Mulberry archive, and the designs don't scare the horses.
The cheapest of the range – the Small Satchel (£495) – is a dinky cross-body pouch reminiscent of Celine's cute Box Shoulder bag. The Tessie (£595) is simple and sleek, occupying a similar space to Michael Kors's relatively affordable designs. The slouchy Hobo (£695) is an unstructured soft leather sack that tucks subtly under the arm. All are shapes that customers will feel vaguely familiar with already; they speak of quality and long-lasting appeal rather than boundary-breaking high fashion.
For years, Mulberry's quirky fashion shows and starry front rows – where Kate Moss would sit beside Alexa Chung and Lana Del Rey – were a key part of the brand's identity, and naming specific handbags after celebrities was a key motif. But the world has moved on from tribute "It" bags, as the success of more anonymous products by Kors, Coach and Celine attests.
As a brand, Mulberry hasn't entirely kissed glitz goodbye. At the most recent London fashion week, for example, the company launched a collection of youthful, idiosyncratic bags with Cara Delevingne, featuring brightly coloured camouflage-print rucksacks and quirky lion rivets.
The collaboration was a good move for stardust, pizzazz and publicity, but the company well knows that the business cannot rely on purple quilted rucksacks costing upwards of £1,000 to thrive. In current fashion, simple works – and the Tessie range is wilfully simple. The style set may not be obsessed, but commercially, pandering to the familiar and classic makes a lot of sense.
Quirky fashion brand Ted Baker has announced an 18% leap in sales as British fashion chains enjoyed their first full quarter of growth in four years.
Good weather and improving consumer confidence helped fashion retailers' sales increase 0.7% in May after lifts of 2.1% in April and 4.3% in March, according to the BDO High Street Sales tracker, which covers 85 mid-sized chains including French Connection, Gap, Hobbs and Paperchase.
Homewares stores saw even stronger growth with sales up 5.1% in May, according to the accountancy firm's regular survey, after increases of 7.8% in April and 2.1% in March.
Sophie Bevan, head of retail and wholesale at BDO, said: "The high street feels like it has turned a corner. The exciting thing is that not only is growth coming from all sectors, it's coming from the majority of retailers as opposed to just a minority boosting the overall performance.
"It's also encouraging that shoppers are getting excited about new season lines rather than just buying what they need in a sale." She said sales would have been even better if it had not been for the London tube strikes.
Ted Baker said its sales were boosted by a 48% rise in online sales in the most recent months. High street sales were up nearly 16% as the group opened new stores in Glasgow, Heathrow Terminal 2 and Philadelphia in the US.
Ray Kelvin, the company's chief executive, said the figures were not a reflection of any up-tick in the wider economy. "We are not a barometer. Our customers have an appetite for Ted Baker. As long as we look after the product, we increase the numbers in good time and bad," he said.
Analysts said that Ted Baker's sales growth was slightly ahead of expectations but the shares lost 4% to £19.35 as some investors felt the shares were becoming expensive.
Jonathan Pritchard, an analyst at Oriel Securities who downgraded Ted Baker shares from a buy to an add recommendation, said the pace of Ted Baker's sales growth had "barely flickered" and had not suffered any pain from the discounting activity of online retailer Asos, which stocks its clothing. But he added: "Sometimes brilliant companies just get close to full value."
You may have noticed that there is a small football tournament about to kick off in Brazil, and in at least one sense we will have home interest all the way to the final.
British bookmakers remain among the favourites to triumph in the World Cup – they'll take up to £600m online according to a new report by Regulus Insights and Sporting Index – and one of our teams, Betfair, will limber up for the big event this week by unveiling its annual results.
Over the past two years, under the guidance of boss Breon Corcoran, the company has been in decent form, with the shares up about 33%. Investors are now expecting more encouraging trading news this week, as well as some guidance on what the company plans to do with around £200m of cash.
Still, the fear from the terraces is that Corcoran's reign could prove analogous with Sven-Göran Eriksson's England career (save brushes with secretaries and fake sheikhs): he inherited such a mess that a few simple tweaks produced decent early results.
The big question is if Betfair, unlike Eriksson's England, can kick on from an encouraging early spell, as Corcoran's cost-cutting regime is surely reaching a conclusion, while there are tactical concerns about growing the betting exchange and diminishing bets from unregulated markets. Developing, as they say.
The City is littered with stories of people metaphorically losing their shirts – but very few of folk getting rich on the back of one.
But that's the tale of Ray Kelvin, the rather oddball founder of fashion chain Ted Baker, who for some reason obscures his face when photographed.
"We created a shirt that everyone in the country, for some wonderful reason, wanted to wear," he told the Telegraph last year. "It was during the period of Acid House and Garage, and they wore these bright acidy-colour shirts ... We floated the business [in 1997], really on the back of that shirt."
Kelvin's stake is now worth more than £300m, despite flogging about £20m of shares last year, which makes him just about the only seller in the Square Mile. His analyst fans are expecting more decent news when the company hands out its trading statement on Tuesday, with around 15% sales growth coming on top of a decent performance last year.
Still, if you're being picky, one concern remains. In March, Kelvin was awarded one of those "outstanding contribution to retail" awards – the type of gong that is frequently a sell sign.
So, how dicey is the hospital pass about to be received by Mike Coupe, the Sainsbury's commercial director who will succeed Justin King as chief executive next month?
We might get some clues this week as the grocer becomes the latest to address investors, following last week's Tesco and Morrisons horror shows.
You'll recall that just over a year ago, King was pledging himself to Sainsbury's for the "long term" – until U-turning more sharply than a dodgy supermarket trolley by admitting in January he was past his sell-by date.
By an astonishing coincidence, 36 unbroken quarters of growth then came to a crashing halt and the City is pencilling in another negative three months this time. Analysts at Jefferies reckon like-for-like sales will slip by 0.5% and add: "Sainsbury's sales performance remains extremely volatile. Impressive trading around major events is followed by quite uneventful sales in normal conditions."
To be fair, Coupe's hardly inheriting woes comparable to his two listed rivals – but the German discounters have changed the market, possibly for good. So King's legacy to his old pal is that the new Sainsbury's boss will have to live well with less, as the company (almost) used to tell customers. That doesn't seem like King's style.
Angela Ahrendts, former chief executive of Burberry, called her chief creative officer "one of this generation's greatest visionaries". We learned this week that Christopher Bailey, now her successor, was also the recipient last summer of one of this generation's greatest retention bonuses – a cool £15m.
The payment was quietly disclosed on page 104 of the fashion house's annual report. Bailey got 1m shares as an "exceptional" award last July when Burberry's share price, as now, was about £15. It was his second such "exceptional" award; he also got 350,000 shares in December 2010, worth about £4m at the time.
Cheap at the price, some Burberry investors may feel, if they have enjoyed the rise in the share price from 400p a decade ago and share Ahrendts's assessment of Bailey's talents.
OK, but aren't share-based awards worth many millions meant to be tied explicitly to future success via performance hurdles? In Bailey's case, his exceptional handouts merely required him to stay at Burberry "over three, four and five years from the date of grant".
Naturally, he also got a performance-related bundle when he succeeded Ahrendts last month. It amounted to 500,000 shares, worth £7.5m at current prices. In total, then, Bailey has had share awards worth £22.5m in the past year.
They pay themselves well at the top of the fashion world but, by the standards of a mid-ranking FTSE-100 firm (Burberry is worth £7bn), it's a lot. Bosses of titans such as Vodafone or GlaxoSmithKline would struggle to command awards of that size in such a short period.
The other oddity in Bailey's pay package is his £440,000 annual cash "allowance" in addition to his £1.1m salary. As mentioned here a few weeks ago, Burberry refuses to say what this "allowance" is for. It does not cover Bailey's clothes, cars or medical insurance – that much is spelled out. Instead, the pay report says the £440,000 was "agreed in his previous role, prior to his appointment as an executive director". That is not an explanation.
"I hope you find this report clear and comprehensive and I look forward to hearing your feedback," writes Ian Carter, head of the pay committee, in his introductory remarks.
Since you ask, Mr Carter, the answer is: no, some of this stuff is as clear as mud. Bailey, having arrived on the board after the end of the financial year, is not even included in the standard table listing directors' full interests in shares. Yet the note on page 104 reveals there are "a number" of share awards from past years "in addition" to the £15m and £4m. Why not just let investors see the full tally?
The point is not to gawp at Bailey's rewards, and wonder what else is yet to be disclosed. The real question for Burberry shareholders is whether the board, led by chairman Sir John Peace, has simply made an almighty bet on one man's genius.
Bailey is now both chief executive and chief creative officer, the two most important jobs at the company. He has been given £15m worth of freebie shares to encourage him to stay. And he gets a £440,000 annual allowance because he always has. Normal boardroom pay practices for FTSE-100 firms have been discarded.
Standard Chartered, where Peace is also chairman, suffered a 41% rebellion against its pay report last month. One top-10 fund manager said the bank's communication amounted to "making it up as they went along".
Before they vote on Burberry's report, investors should demand more transparency from Peace. Maybe there is a case for paying an "unconventional" chief executive – Bailey's own description – in an unconventional manner. But the argument has not been made in this annual report.
Here's one way to deal with choppy conditions in the flotation market: flog two-thirds of the company to nine institutions beforehand. AA's sale-cum-flotation is either a clever or a desperate tactic by the owners, the private equity firms CVC, Permira and Charterhouse.
The clever part is that they have avoided the risk of a flotation flop along the lines of Saga, the other firm that used to be housed under their Acromas banner. By accepting an offer of £930m for 67% of the AA, they have established a certain value.
The (possibly) desperate part lies in the fact that such certainty tends to require a discount. One suspects Aviva, BlackRock, GLG, Lansdowne and the other "cornerstone" investing institutions have done their homework. The AA is tricky to value because it is towing £3bn of debt. But it is a highly cash-generative business; it is the biggest operator in a market where size brings clear advantages; and profit margins on the main roadside assistance business were close to 50% at the trading level last year.
In other words, the AA's road to paying down that debt is long but visibility is excellent. The implied price tag of £1.38bn for 100% of the equity may turn out to be very good business for buyers who are prepared to commit for the long-term.
Bob Mackenzie, formerly of Green Flag and National Car Parks, is leading the new management team that took the deal to the institutions and found £930m of support. He has shown sharp manoeuvring skills on this deal.
The International Monetary Fund is (or used to be) zealously opposed to almost any form of capital control. So, when it argues for greater restrictions on mortgages to confront the risks of a dangerous housing bubble in London and the south-east, it is probably wise to listen.
A few banks are already tightening lending criteria. Lloyds, for example, said last month that it would limit mortgage lending to four times income for loans worth more than £500,000. But, rather than rely on banks to apply common sense, the Bank of England's financial policy committee should define what it regards as safe lending in a post-frenzy climate. And it should do so at this month's meeting.
As for Help to Buy, George Osborne's much-maligned scheme, it is probably not the greatest culprit. The data suggests very few homes in London are being bought with the help of government guarantees. But perceptions matter and Help to Buy may be encouraging the foolish thought among stretched borrowers that London houses are always a one-way bet. As a first step, cut the maximum value of qualifying houses from £600,000 to £300,000; then phase out Help to Buy altogether.
It is a shame TSB over-egged its new pay policy by claiming to have "taken inspiration" from John Lewis by making its staff "partners". The terminology doesn't work. Staff at John Lewis are partners because John Lewis isn employee-owned partnership. TSB after separation from Lloyds, will be owned by shareholders and gifting the staff £100 of shares does not make them partners.
Never mind, the analogy is better for its all-employee annual bonus scheme. Here recipients – "from CEO to frontline branch staff" – will receive the same percentage of salary as an annual cash bonus. Yes, that is roughly how John Lewis does things.
Inevitably, TSB executives, led by chief executive Paul Pester, will enjoy a separate bonus scheme on top, which is not John Lewis-like. But the sums are a step down from normal banking fare (Pester's all-in maximum earnings would be £1.687m) and TSB says bonuses will be tied to levels of customer service, rather than flogging financial products. Details will be crucial, but TSB's approach looks promising.
Global domination, it turns out, is harder to achieve than Asos's fan club had thought. The march towards annual sales of £2.5bn, from about £1bn currently, had been pencilled in as a four-year exercise to be conducted with steady profit margins of 6.5%-7%. That was the assumption that underpinned the bizarre and breezy willingness of some investors to pay almost 100 times earnings to get a slice of the action.
If you pay those prices, you're asking for trouble. It has duly arrived, in the form of Asos's warning that its profit margin this financial year won't be anything like 6.5%. It will be just 4.5%. Bang goes about a third of this year's expected pre-tax profits. Forget £65m, the outcome will be more like £45m.
What out-of-left-field mischief is at work? Despite Asos chief executive Nick Robertson's attempt to blame "an unusual combination of factors," the explanation is mundane if you're in the game of selling goods to 200 countries: old-fashioned currency movements, specifically the strength of sterling.
The Barnsley-based firm, operating off a sterling cost base and a sterling pricing structure, has been forced to discount heavily to compete in countries with weaker currencies – Russia, for example. What's more, when surplus stock is cleared in the UK, where sales are subject to VAT, the trade carries lower profit margins.
In the scheme of things, this is merely a serious setback for Asos rather than a catastrophe. The introduction of so-called zonal pricing may help in time. But the manner in which the firm was dragged into heavy discounting ought to alarm investors. Maybe a steady profit margin of 6.5% is simply outside management's control when you're attempting to expand internationally at a rate of 30% a year.
But Thursday's one-third collapse in the share price to £31.20 is definitely a catastrophe for those investors who were chasing the stock at £70 early this year. What were they thinking? At that point, Asos was worth £6bn, or about 90 times expected profits before Thursday's heavy revision.
Even now, at £31.20, the stock is hardly cheap – the valuation represents about 75 times expected earnings of 40p a share. Would you really pay that for a business that has now had two profit warnings – a mild one in March and now a thumper – in the space of three months?
Asos remains a great pioneering business – a UK internet champion in clothing. But the risks and potential rewards for investors still look wildly out of sync.
Fashion company Burberry handed Christopher Bailey, promoted to chief executive last month, a one-off award of shares worth almost £15m last summer.
The award of the shares, which are not related to performance, was revealed in the annual report, which also showed that Bailey was handed another one-off award of shares in December 2010 worth around £4m at the time.
The disclosure of the share handouts follows the revelation last month that Bailey, previously the company's chief creative officer, was handed a golden hello in shares worth up to £7.6m. Following his promotion to chief executive, to replace Angela Ahrendts who has joined Apple, Bailey was awarded 500,000 shares, which are related to performance and could pay out between 2017 and 2019.
The share price last night was £14.95.
The UK-born executive, who remains both the chief creative and chief executive officer, is also receiving £440,000 of cash allowances on top of a £1.1m salary and annual cash bonus of up to £2.2m.
In total Bailey could receive up to £10.3m this year, depending on the company's performance.
The company provides little disclosure about how many shares Bailey – who is in his 13th year at Burberry – owns or could own through share schemes. But it does reveal that – well before he became chief executive – he was handed 1m shares in July 2013 and 350,000 in December 2010, which he will receive between 2015 and 2018 and which are not related to performance.
In the annual report, Ahrendts - who is holding on to two share bonuses worth up to £6.2m and is receiving £40m in shares from her employer Apple - writes that she is looking forward to watching the company develop.
Sir John Peace, chairman of the company and nominations committee, said in the annual report that Bailey had been appointed to the enlarged role because of "unique qualities and deep experience" and that head hunters were not used to find a successor to Ahrendts.
Other annual reports released on Thursday show that the boss of Marks & Spencer, Marc Bolland, missed out on bonuses and rejected a pay rise. His salary was unchanged at £970,000 and his total pay down from £2.1m to £1.6m.
Chinese shoppers could almost double the amount they spend to £3.5tn in four years with clothing offering the best opportunity for western retailers.
As online fashion retailer Asos struggles to get a foothold in the fast-growing market, a report from consultancy Conlumino suggests that £212bn will be spent on clothing in China in 2018, more than double the £103bn in 2013. Growth is being driven by young Chinese women adopting western lifestyles, with more working and taking on senior roles and putting off having children until their late 20s, giving them disposable income and making them more likely to spend.
"The growth of the internet and social media have generated global fashion trends and this has made it far easier for international fashion brands to expand," said Maureen Hinton, Conlumino global research director.
But China has not been an easy market for western retailers to tackle. Asos shares dived after it admitted that losses at its fledgling operation in the country reach £9m this year rather than the £6m previously indicated. Other retailers from Tesco to DIY group Kingfisher and even luxury brands such as Burberry have not found the market as easy to crack as much bigger local operators put up a strong fight and savvy consumers hunt for good deals.
The streets of east London looked more vibrant and outlandish than ever this weekend, when the world's biggest student fashion event – Graduate Fashion Week – opened its doors at Brick Lane's Truman Brewery, a new location in the beating heart of modern British fashion.
Now in its 23rd year, GFW is best known for the wackiest of its students' creations: the gimp masks and cellophane-wrapped naked bottoms most likely to make the front pages of newspapers. But for the event's organisers the showcase has a rather more sensible purpose: to ensure that BA fashion students find work after graduation.
Over four days, the work of 1,000 students from 42 universities is displayed in 21 catwalk shows, while dozens of talks and seminars are held, from advice on PR from Vivienne Westwood to tips about buying and merchandising from the event's sponsors, George at Asda.
"Everybody wants to be a designer," says GFW chairman Rob Templeman. "But there are more than 800,000 16- to 24-year-olds out of work in the UK, so it's important to remember that there are lots of good careers available in the industry." On the final day, prizes will be awarded, including the top "gold" prize of £10,000 and the opportunity to design a collection for George. The event also offers the chance for students to meet industry scouts. "We very much encourage other retailers, suppliers and manufacturers to attend," says Fiona Lambert, vice-president of George. "There are some incredibly talented young people out there and they need opportunities."
GFW was conceived to give fashion students from outside London a chance to showcase their work in the capital. Although graduates of the MA courses at Central Saint Martins College and the Royal College of Art do not show at the event, it has spawned more than its share of successes, with previous award winners including Matthew Williamson, Julien MacDonald, Burberry CEO and creative director Christopher Bailey, Stella McCartney and Giles Deacon.
The new east London location looks likely to boost awareness even more. "Ticket sales are up by 20%," says Templeman. "We get around 25,000 attendees most years, but this year we are projecting at least 30,000. Brick Lane is the centre of the creative district. It's also a lot more accessible than Earl's Court."
Certainly, for Fashion East founder Lulu Kennedy – who discovered designers including Jonathan Saunders and Richard Nicoll – the move seems significant. "I never made it over to GFW when it was miles away in west London; I tended to look at images online," she says. "But now it's based at the old Truman Brewery, which is where my studio is, I'll definitely be checking out shows. It's exciting to have it in east London, which makes loads more sense, as this is where fashion is actually happening."
While GFW may not have the prestige of the Central Saint Martins MA show – which runs in London Fashion Week – its breadth and diversity of talent has long been taken seriously by the industry. "This is the germination of the seeds of future fashion. That's the deal," says Gordon Richardson, creative director of Topman. "It's crucial." Former GFW winner Julien Macdonald says: "Winning GFW launched my career, and it was a proud moment because the competition is there."
The award's first winner, Christopher Bailey, now one of the most powerful people in British fashion, agrees: "We have the most exceptional design talent coming out of our colleges and I salute their energy, their talent and their well-earned and deserved global reputation."
Last year's "gold" award winner, Lauren Smith from Edinburgh College of Art, won £20,000 and the chance to design a collection for George. She describes the experience as "beyond amazing". The money is still in the bank and Smith is considering putting it towards launching her own business when she finishes her MA.
Work: Woodgate's knitwear is inspired by "Buddhist Mandala, African tribal patterns and the Cornish landscape." She adds: "One of the biggest influences has been the processes of knit, crochet and macramé, which have allowed me to develop my own stitch patterns and creativity." Her GFW collection has so far required 1,700 hours of knitting ("and still one jumper to go").
The future: "I would love to work with [experimental knitwear queen] Sandra Backlund, who has had a massive influence on me, she says"
Work: McNair's pretty, commercial prints are inspired by "imagery collected of washing lines, recreated in abstract and geometric forms".
Experience: Internships at Burberry, Oliver Knipe and Topshop and a three-month placement with Intrex in China. "After only two weeks at Burberry, I could have stayed there forever. It was such an amazing environment," says McNair.
The future: McNair will work at Abercrombie and Fitch in Columbus, Ohio, for a year from February, after which she plans to launch her own label.
Work: Structured dresses featuring strong silhouettes and laser-cut geometric shapes. Cadar takes inspiration from contemporary art and the vibrant colours of India.
The future: Plans to pursue an MA in design. The ideal audience for her work is the people of London: "I love the quirky, fun and free sense of style you find here."
Work: Pink shearling jackets "inspired by the expeditions of Scott of the Antarctic – I've taken the main aspects of the clothing and created a collection people can wear without the need to go to the South Pole".
Experience: Two months as an intern at Banana Republic in New York working on their spring/summer 2014 collection,.
The future: Aims "to be a creative director of an established fashion brand".
The fashion industry is in a bad state: fatal fires, building collapses, horror stories about environmental destruction and endemic exploitation. So what can be done? Does data monitoring technology offer a solution to these problems?
For the past few decades, determining standards in factories has depended on corporations hiring third parties to carry out audits. Malcolm Guy, founder of continuous data company Supply Link puts it bluntly: corporate audits have failed. Indeed Rana Plaza had been audited twice and served with a clean bill of health by Primark. In Pakistan in 2012 the Ali Enterprises factory fire killed 289 garment workers – despite the factory having been recently inspected and certified by Social Accountability International.
Instead of corporate audits, which can be falsified and quickly become out of date, Guy argues that the fashion industry should be aiming for a constant stream of data providing a clear image of what is happening in factories.
Continuous data – also known as live data – involves collecting information that can be used to monitor energy use, water and waste management, carbon production, and building health and safety. The idea is that constantly collecting data ensures it is timely, accurate, and unhampered. In China continuous data about smog and pollution is recorded and made public.
Schemes can also involve monitoring people. Continuous data can answer questions like: what is the staff turnover at a factory? How many hours are staff working? How efficient are they? With regards to health and safety, during a recent Guardian live chat Amisha Ghadiali, co-founder of Provenance, described the option of brands using heat maps to detect overcrowding. There is also the option of installing cameras in factories to monitor working conditions.
Monitoring people however, is very different to monitoring the environment and raises numerous ethical issues, particularly for somewhere like Bangladesh – a country that according to Privacy International, has no general data protection act.
Multinational fashion corporations select the countries where they manufacture primarily by production costs. Part of ensuring low production costs is keeping wages low, which in turn requires the hampering or outlawing of trade unions and civil society.
When it comes to data collection, Privacy International points out that intelligence services have long "targeted trade unions and other organisations working for progressive social change". In a country like Bangladesh where being a trade union organiser can attract harassment and violence, concerns about monitoring factory workers need to be taken extremely seriously.
There is also the question of whether constant monitoring will really improve workers' lives and happiness? Are we asking people in Bangladesh to submit to something we would not accept in our own workplaces? How do you reach agreement about what is acceptable when those most affected by data capturing have the least say in the process?
A data management consultant in London, who asked to remain anonymous, outlined some of the problems: "There is this constant idea that more is better. While there is not necessarily anything wrong with collecting vast amounts of data, you have to make sure there are protections in place to ensure privacy. This is not scaremongering, when it comes to protecting vulnerable people you can't just give their data away."
In light of data collection revelations around the NSA in the United States and GCHQ in the UK, data collection is an inflammatory topic. "Once it's privatised, data can be used to target you in a way you don't want to be targeted," she continues. "Companies and governments can start profiling you, and your privacy and rights can be seriously compromised."
A major danger for unions would be cameras in and around factories, and there are also major privacy issues here for brands. Supply Link for example has not yet installed a camera in a factory and is wary of doing so. For someone like Malcolm Guy, the ethical case around data has not yet been resolved, and needs a wide social discussion to determine an ethical framework. "When people [ask] me 'what's keeping you awake at night, what's limiting this?' I say, well, ultimately it's the ethics, the human aspect of this."
Data collection should not to be used as an excuse to sideline health and safety legislation and trade unions. Worker-led inspections, like the Bangladesh Accord are a vital element in ensuring building safety, and technology is not a substitute for democratic structures and labour laws that allow workers to protect themselves. The Caracol Industrial Park in Haiti for example cost a staggering $424m (£253m) to build, yet is a deeply exploitative environment.
The philosopher and Emeritus professor at the University of Sussex, István Mészáros cautions against focusing on technology as the key to solving the world's problems. There is, he believes, a greater need to question who currently has control of science and technology, and why. The key question is not which technologies might help solve the problems of the fashion industry but how to change the direction of technology away from its current narrow focus on profit maximisation.
Arundhati Roy sums it up in her fascinating new book Capitalism: A Ghost Story. She describes a "technocratic obsession" with gathering data – "as though it were a lack of information that is the cause of world hunger, and not colonialism, debt, and skewed profit-oriented corporate policy".
• This article was amended on 17 June 2014 to correct the link to Supply Link.
The fashion hub is funded by H&M. All content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled advertisement feature. Find out more here.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Online retailer Asos is backing the expansion of a training programme designed to rebuild skills in the UK clothing manufacturing industry amid hopes that retailers are "reshoring" more orders.
Fashion Enter, a manufacturer that first set up a workshop in London's Haringey in 2008 with just eight workers, now employs 84 people, including 48 machinists, and produces up to 7,500 garments a week for companies including Asos and Marks & Spencer. It currently trains about 20 people every six weeks in basic stitching skills and is working with another 50 apprentices on more complex garment technology skills such as pattern cutting.
But from next year, with the help of funding from Haringey council and the promise of more orders from Asos, it is planning to expand in order to train more than 1,000 people a year in a range of qualifications from stitching to the more technical aspects of clothing production including quality control, pattern cutting and fabric inspection. It is also aiming to extend production to 16,000 garments a week, as it gets more space to train new machinists beyond basic skills.
Jenny Holloway, director of Fashion Enter, admits it is unlikely that all of her new trainees will find work within the UK fashion industry, but she says the UK is becoming more viable for clothing manufacture amid a new awareness of the total cost of sourcing abroad, from transport to paying hotel bills for staff. "In fast fashion there is no substitute for turning a garment around in two or three weeks, as we can do," she says.
Holloway adds that there are now 32 fashion factories in the area, and more planning to open, as demand for UK manufactured clothing hots up.
Nick Walkley, chief executive of Haringey council, adds: "It is easy to see regeneration as just about places like Hoxton with people drinking lattes, but it can also be about artisans making bread or garments at an international scale or single pieces. This area has a real opportunity to deliver quite large-scale employment."
With Memorial Day and summer come a few other traditions: swimsuit shopping, skimpier clothes – and with them, a host of body issues.
So who wants to look up into a store window and, already dissatisfied with one's body, see a mannequin with a concave stomach and visible ribs? 
Does that spur the impulse to buy out of aspiration? Or is it a turnoff? 
La Perla apparently thought its chic customers – who drop hundreds of dollars on high-status underthings – would relate to, or admire, such a vision.
It didn’t quite work out that way. “How does #LaPerla think ribs on a mannequin is ok?! @SethMatlins,” fumed influential tech entrepreneur Michael Rudoy on Twitter, tagging truth-in-advertising activist Seth Matlins.
Score one for Matlins. La Perla quickly removed the mannequins, and tweeted that they wouldn’t be used in another La Perla boutique. The company added that it is updating its entire mannequin collection.
“The mannequin photographed has been removed from the store and will not be used again by any La Perla boutique. We are in the process of redesigning all La Perla stores with a new concept image and the mannequins that are currently displayed in our US stores will no longer be used. We appreciate and value everyone's comments, thank you for bringing this to our attention.”
Yet La Perla is not a one-time offender – several weeks ago the lingerie company’s Instagram featured a model beside a mannequin with impossibly skinny legs.
“I think it is much worse to have their ribs showing,” said Jean Kilbourne, a former model and honorary member of Wellesley’s Centers for Women. 
But even Kilbourne will tell you: “The extremity of it catches our attention, but this is really not new.”
In fact, it’s becoming more of a trend: expect the impossibly slim, the white and the sinewy to dominate chic windows.
Typical mannequin measurements, excluding the very chesty or bootylicious, are an almost impossible ideal: around 6ft tall, 34in bust, 24in waist, 34in hips.
Two large mannequin suppliers said their most popular color is alabaster white, although it used to be “flesh tone” – that is, flesh-toned if you are white. And both said their clients’ desires are trending toward more “sculpted” mannequins that show off “musculature”. 
“If you do something that's sort of a thinner mannequin, you're doing that one group that says it's too thin,” said Goldsmith’s creative director and CEO Dan Evans. His company supplies mannequins to many high-end department stores, including Nordstrom, Bergdorf Goodman and Macy’s. Evans has also worked with La Perla. 
The enduring best-seller of Goldsmith’s collection, he said, is the “classic” mannequin. The very detailed female model doesn’t have visible ribs; instead, she has six-pack abs. 
That's OK, say suppliers.
“Most people are looking at the garment, and not what the mannequin represents,” said Barry Rosenberg, partner at Mondo Mannequins, which can produce up to 2,000 mannequins a day.
“I mean, I'm not going to tell you anything you wouldn't already know. Why are models 6ft tall with small breasts, and extremely long legs? Because they look the best in the garment,” said Rosenberg.
Rosenberg laughed at the description of the possibly too-skinny ribby mannequins. 
“We don't make mannequins that are 5ft 3in and 160lbs,” he said.
The average American woman is 5ft 3in and 166lbs, according to the CDC.
The industry’s also been questioned about using larger mannequins, as Evans noted. Dame Sally Davies, England’s chief medical officer, told the Telegraph she felt size-16 mannequins introduced in Britain’s Debenhams department store “normalized” obesity.
Goldsmith's Evans suggests it's not his choice. "At that point, the fashion industry and our customer dictate those sizes,” he said.
The trend is towards thinner and ribby mannequins promote unhealthy body image, as many truth-in-advertising advocates will tell you.
“It's bad enough that they're so thin,” said Kilbourne. “It makes them look even more anorexic. Having the ribs showing is a sign of starvation, malnutrition, eating disorders. It's appalling,” she said.
Other unrealistic mannequins? In Venezuela and Miami Beach, Florida, chesty mannequins look like they’ve had silicone implants. In Gap stores, a Twitter account called @InMySkinnyDream chronicled Gap’s toothpick-legged dolls by the “Always Skinny” jean.
“One of the big – and I’ve been talking about this forever – is it all becomes invisible in a way because we're so used to it, and if its brought to people's attention, that sort of breaks through the clutter,” said Kilbourne, the body-image advocate. “I think it's pretty freakish for ribs to be showing.”
Retailers including H&M, New Look and Zara owner Inditex are to meet the Cambodian government early next week to seek better treatment of clothing factory workers in the country.
The meeting, which will also be attended by international union IndustriALL, comes as workers campaigning for an increase in the national minimum wage and improved conditions in factories have faced detention and intimidation in a country where few trade unions operate. A series of mass faintings at clothing factories have also highlighted poor conditions.
IndustriALL's general secretary, Jyrki Raina, who will be attending the meeting and also representing the ITUC and Uni Global Union, said: "Despite assurances from the government in February, there have since been unprecedented levels of intimidation, violence and a declining respect for the rule of law, which together constitute a grave attack on union and worker rights.
"The concerted message from global unions and brands to the Cambodian government is clear: political stability and respect for human and worker rights are essential to maintaining sourcing in Cambodia."
In the past few months striking garment workers, who want the monthly minimum wage to double to $160, have faced brutal action by police with at least five workers left dead. Some workers involved in the protests have been dismissed and some factory owners have responded to protests with lawsuits against union leaders.
An estimated 400,000 people, mostly women, work in Cambodia's garment factories which are the country's biggest export earner. Brands have warned that unrest caused by poor treatment of workers threatens Cambodia's future as a "stable sourcing location". Pressure on retailers to ensure the safety of factory workers has also increased in the wake of the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh in 2013 in which more than 1,100 workers died.
• Did the Rana Plaza factory disaster change your fashion buying habits?
"My new role is an unconventional role and my background is not one of a traditional CEO," declared Christopher Bailey as he set out his stall as the new boss of Burberry. Fair enough. He may be a breath of fresh air, and it should not be remarkable that a fashion company has chosen to appoint its creative guru as its chief executive.
But it would be a disgrace if a healthy disregard for convention is used to excuse the award to Bailey of a mysterious £440,000 annual "allowance". It's not as if he's badly paid on the normal stuff.
He'll get a £1.1m salary, the chance to earn a £2.2m bonus every year. And promotion yielded a performance-related golden hello in the form of £7.6m in shares. So what's the "allowance" meant to cover? Burberry refuses to say.
Is Bailey permitted to spend the sum, which works out at £1,235 a day, as he wishes? If so, it's a second salary, in non-pensionable form, and Burberry is silly to pretend otherwise.
If the £440,000 is meant to cover the necessity of wearing Burberry clothes, does Bailey really need a new outfit every day?
The great man himself is not taking questions. He declined to speak to the press on the day Burberry announced its full-year results. That, presumably, is another quirk of his "unconventional" approach to the job.
Actually, though, it's Sir John Peace, Burberry chairman, and Ian Carter, head of the remuneration committee, who should explain the "allowance". Most FTSE 100 companies are shifting towards greater transparency on pay but Burberry seems to be running in the opposite direction.
Standard Chartered, where Peace is also chairman, suffered a 41% rebellion on its pay policy the other week and fund managers complain about the bank's arrogant approach to communications.
Peace, it seems, has learned nothing from that episode.
Professor Louise Wilson, who was a long-serving course director at Central Saint Martins at University of the Arts London, died on Friday at the age of 52.
She had been credited with helping shape the careers of the designers Alexander McQueen and Stella McCartney, and was recognised for her influence on fashion with an OBE in 2008.
Wilson, who leaves a partner Timmi and son TJ, was also recently included on a list of 125 of the most "intelligent, empowered and inspirational" women by The Lady magazine.
In a statement, the college said: "Louise has been an inspirational person both within the college and the wider world of fashion.
"Since becoming course director for the MA fashion course in 1992, she has taught a huge proportion of the world's leading fashion designers and her course continues to produce talented ground-breaking graduates.
"Her commitment to her students and passion for creative excellence are legendary. Her deep understanding of fashion and her drive for funding for bursaries, facilities and opportunities are part of what made her such an extraordinary educator.
"Louise's legacy will live on at CSM through her former students and current teaching colleagues who were so close to her. Central Saint Martins is grateful to have been able to enjoy the fruits of Louise's great talent for educating for the last 22 years and will support her staff and students as they go forward from here."
McCartney was among those paying tribute to the tutor, described by many as "legendary".
Writing on Twitter, McCartney said: "What an inspiration and force in fashion. I send my deep sympathy to your family.
"No one will ever replace you because you were a true one off. Louise we will all miss you r.i.p xx stella"
Caroline Rush, chief executive of the British Fashion Council, added: "Prof Louise Wilson, I can't believe you have gone. You were much loved and respected. A legend and an inspiration. RIP."
Young designers need to establish an online presence early on and embrace technology, as it has become an "essential part" of the fashion business, according to the chief executive of the British Fashion Council.
"Technology has become so much more accessible and ingrained in the way we do business, shop and communicate," Caroline Rush told the Decoded Fashion summit in London.
She said technology had become an essential part of the business and as a result of adopting online platforms and developing their e-commerce, many designers are now selling directly to the consumer at a much faster pace than would have been the course traditionally.
"It's really about bringing the fashion and tech sectors together and providing opportunities to help young designers get online – that is helping them to do it in the right way, to make sure there's mentors around them so that it is successful and they're learning... from challenges and hurdles that come with any retail platform."
Rush added that fashion businesses that "get it right" could grow more quickly and see better profits. "In London, people are seeing that there is a really great movement going on in the fashion and tech world. If [the BFC] can support that to grow, it is an added feather in our cap for the fashion industry.
"We're also seeing lots of tech firms who are coming to work with designers so that the tech that they have can be put into really beautiful products and that's an exciting moment for us," Rush told the summit attendees, a mixture of industry insiders and enthusiasts from the tech, retail, marketing and fashion sectors.
Henry Holland, the designer who first started selling his bold T-shirt designs on Myspace, said he found the main challenge to be keeping up with the development of technology.
Fellow designer Mary Katrantzou, know for her detailed print creations, said designers allowed time to build a brand creatively but "maybe we don't necessarily have the time, network or knowledge about what to do technologically".
She also highlighted a desire for technology that could make studio life easier. Asked what would be a dream app, Rush replied that an app tracking the reputation brands are building would be much coveted by the BFC. Katrantzou said she would like an app that could offer a pool of logistics information, providing price comparison costs that she says would "save a lot of time across the company".
The British designer Lulu Guinness said designers should not be afraid of incorporating technology into their brand. "You’ve got to be fearless, I think you get left behind otherwise," she said. "You've just got to go with it – use your intelligence, your common sense. If you’re a fashion retailer you should be embracing every single type of technology you can."
Guinness was enthusiastic about the prospect of 3D printing, even declaring it would be a perfect fit for the Perspex lip-shaped purse her brand has become known for. She was quick to add that some items would still need to be produced by the hands of craftsmen.
The British Fashion Council also released a report on Tuesday entitled Commercialising Creativity – Creating a Model for Success for British Fashion Designers, which said young British designers should emulate Silicon Valley and view the launch of a fashion brand as an entrepreneurial venture.
The report echoes comments from Liz Bacelar, the founder of Decoded Fashion, who told the Guardian this year that “designers need to launch like startups”. The release also marks a new partnership between the London Business School and the British Fashion Council, which was also announced on Tuesday.
"O fat white woman whom nobody loves / Why do you walk through the fields in gloves?"
These lines by Frances Cornford "To a fat lady seen from a train" surely epitomise outsize unhappiness. Poor fat woman: unloved by designers, manufacturers, and shops, tramping on in a Vogue-inspired attempt at self-reduction, wearing gloves in the fields in absolute despair. "If I can't look like Jean Shrimpton, at least I'll look respectable." Defensive overdressing is the saddest thing of all.
A quarter of the women in Britain are fat. Their hips range from 42 inches to five feet. And judging by the response to Elizabeth Gundrey's column ("send me a postcard non-standard women, please"), almost all the outsize women in Britain read the Guardian.
Manufacturers cannot go on ignoring such an army. In fact, specialist outsize firms have made a calculation: their annual sales of dresses alone should be rising from two million to as high as nine million.
For the sake of fat women, sixteen manufacturers are running a sales campaign. They held a fashion show. Philip Kunick, chairman of Outsize Fashion, told svelte young fashion writers that the group's foremost aim was to upgrade outsize clothes so that outsize women everywhere could get satisfaction "at least as good as their slimmer sisters." On came outsize models: smiling ones, skipping ones, a thoroughgoing grande dame, which all went to show, I think, that fatness strikes all sorts.
The show was well meaning and the compere reassuring to large women as well as "the more comfortable girl". He told us that plump girls keep their husbands, skinny girls are apt to lose them; thin women have sad skin, plump girls look radiant. "If you're a large girl you might as well look happy."
The fashion show was kindly, and this may have raised morale. But I doubt if it will make large girls much happier in the long-term. These firms are just not answering fat women's constant pleas for smart clothes, plain clothes, clothes that feel in fashion. Printed brushed nylon does not help a sturdy shape: a picture-frame neckline exaggerates big busts.
Outsize manufacturers are making big mistakes. When their clothes are not just tactless, they are uniformly drab. No wonder fat women, disenchanted with big stores and "fuller figure" clothes shops, have dresses made in private. No wonder they feel cross. No wonder millions mope about, unfashionable in gloves.
Young British designers should emulate Silicon Valley and Stella McCartney and view the launch of a fashion brand as an entrepreneurial venture – not solely a creative endeavour – according to a report published today by The British Fashion Council.
Titled Commercialising Creativity – Creating a Model for Success for British Fashion Designers, the paper claims that there is a dearth of guidance available to fashion designers starting their own businesses, an anomaly in an industry that employs almost 800,000 people and makes £26bn annually.
"Our ambition is that future generations of designers will understand how to create a business plan and source investment in the same way the tech industry does," said BFC CEO Caroline Rush. Rush added that the findings would help young designers "evaluate the kind of business they want to be and the questions they should be addressing from the start."
Written by Alessandra Basso and Alejandra Caro, MBA students from London Business School, the report is the result of hours of interviews with designers, retailers, advisors, PRs and investors, and gives seven key recommendations for fashion business growth. They are:
• Behave as a business, not as an artisan.
• Develop the brand's identity and support it with a marketing and communications plan.
• Understand and address the challenges of production.
• Understand the importance of cashflow, funding and financing.
It includes case studies on the story behind British fashion success stories including Nicholas Kirkwood – the shoe designer in which luxury conglomerate LVMH has recently acquired a stake – and McCartney, concluding that much of her success has been due to her unique position as a brand. With McCartney's committed ethical stance – using organic materials to create luxury products, including non-leather shoes – she "sells a sense of moral satisfaction to her customers, and people love her for it, "the paper says. The report also addresses issues such as finding the right business partner and understanding the importance of costing. Joseph Velosa chairman Matthew Williamson says: "We dedicate many meetings to analysing costing and set up prices because if you get that wrong, you potentially lose thousands of pounds ... If something doesn't make a margin, unless it's a very beautiful piece, you take it out of the collection." It also urges the government to consider giving tax incentives for investment in fashion design and access to funding to help designers' businesses grow.
Today's release marks a new partnership between the London Business School and the British Fashion Council. Through this relationship, "we aim to encourage more MBA graduates to pursue rewarding careers in the sector, working with British designers to assist them in fulfilling their potential for growth," said Rush.
The boho maxi dresses, flowing blouses and feminine tailoring have little to do with the androgynous shapes or minimalist cuts that have been strutting down the catwalks of late.
But the first Kate Moss collection for Topshop in four years, which is more reminiscent of the model drinking wine on a yacht, or smoking a fag on a night out in Soho, seems only likely to cement her role as national institution. As the supermodel described it to the Guardian recently, the latest range is a "wardrobe autobiography". As Topshop's website puts it, "the icon is back".
Moss launched the range at Topshop's flagship Oxford Circus branch in central London on Tuesday night, where small shoppers' queues began to form at around 1pm to get their hands on her 15th collection - the first since 2010 - for the brand.
Shoppers lined the pavement outside Topshop on Oxford Street, spilling into the road, much to the bemusement of tourists and the chagrin of stewards dispatched to keep them from getting run over. Shortly before 6.30pm, Moss herself was unveiled in the shop window, presented by Radio1 DJ Nick Grimshaw, and soon doors opened to shoppers, some of whom had been waiting for over five hours.
Emma, 26, was first in the queue at 1pm and first at the tills. She spent £240, the prized item being a leather jacket costing £190. "She's got such a great variety, different themes running through the collection. I didn't try anything on, I just went for it," she said.
Tina, 45, from Buckinghamshire queued for two hours. "I wanted the leather jacket for me, then my daughter wanted something, then my niece said 'get something for me." She spent £1,000 and bought eight items. "I think it's worth it because Moss is unique and the clothes are instantly recognisable as her. Also I've bought her Topshop stuff in the past and it lasts a long time. You'll be wearing it for years because it's a classic piece."
Not everyone was there to grab a Moss item. Jenny, from London, found herself at the back of a three and a half hour queue to return a pair of shoes. 'I'm not really a fan of Kate Moss,' she explained, much to her daughter's exasperation
At a side entrance surrounded by red carpet a group of Italian tourists were content to watch the show.
Amy Moosah, a 27-year-old stylist, was among those in the queue. She liked the "elegant and bohemian" range, adding that Moss was the model of her generation.
Designed with Katy England, the collection features 40 pieces and centres heavily on a summer beach ethos - fringed kaftans and beaded shirts. There are also Kate classics - an asymmetrical yellow dress she wore in 2003 is repeated here, also in black and green. Great Gatsby-esque shapes pop up in high-waisted silk trousers and a black jumpsuit. And befitting a woman who, despite cultivating a flourishing business built solely on her personal brand and is best known for her love of partying, the latest collection suggests hedonism, not workwear. It is notable that most of the collection will also be stocked by Net-A-Porter, the online luxury retailer who don't usually do high street.
"I have really missed being involved in the design process, and working with the team at Topshop," said Moss, a regular holiday companion of Topshop boss Sir Philip Green. "I am very excited to create a new collection that bears my name. Now more than ever, with London being at the forefront of fashion, as it feels like I'm back home working with Topshop."
This latest collection marks the end of a four-year hiatus for Moss on designing duty. First launched in 2007, the debut Topshop collection was initially deemed a risk, coming as it did a year after Metropolitan police dropped charges against the model in the wake of footage of her allegedly snorting lines of cocaine.
But the success of her first collection - which she unveiled by posing in the window of Topshop, laughing and smiling as punters elbowed each other out of the way to get in - was a significant part of the great Moss comeback of 2007. From dropped modelling gigs and cancelled contracts to a current net worth of over £8m, according to Forbes, Moss is more successful than most models half her age. Though at 40 she shows no sign of leaving the catwalk, her return to designing coincides with a role as contributing fashion editor at British Vogue, for whom she styled her first photoshoot earlier this year.
 Bangladeshi garment worker Aroti, 17, who worked on the 5th floor of Rana Plaza, stands with the help of an artificial leg at her home in Savar. Photograph: AM Ahad/AP
Primark, the fashion store that brought the £3 jumper dress to the British shopper, is to open in the US as it attempts to become a global chain.
The budget retailer, owned by Associated British Foods, will open its first store in Boston, Massachusetts, in 2015 and said it was in negotiations to open up to eight further stores in north-east America, with warehousing to support them.
America has proved to be a leap too far for most UK retailers: Marks & Spencer, WH Smith, Sainsbury's and, most recently, Tesco have all seen their stateside ventures founder. However, fashion chains Topshop and Ted Baker have found favour with US shoppers.
Primark said it had decided to take its concept to the US after extensive research.
Primark has defied the recession to become one of the fastest-growing retail businesses in western Europe. It has more than 270 stores in nine countries, including Spain, Portugal, Germany and the Netherlands. In the past year it has opened over 1m sq ft of new retail space as it took its brand of cut-price fashion to France with stores in Marseille and Dijon.
"We think we have as differentiated and attractive a proposition in the US as we have in continental Europe and the British Isles. We think we have something special to offer," said George Weston, ABF chief executive.
The 70,000sq ft Boston store – as big as an out-of-town UK superstore – will open at the end of next year.
In the year ahead, Weston said, Primark expected to open about another 1m sq ft of space across Europe and the UK. It wants to open stores in York, Milton Keynes, Bath and Canterbury and also plans a big expansion of its Birmingham outlet.
Weston said Primark had been encouraged to go to the US by its experience in different markets in Europe, and heading over the Atlantic looked more attractive than the Far East or eastern Europe.
"It seemed a better option than anywhere else," he said.
The US venture is an ambitious new chapter for the retailer, which began life in 1969 as a single shop in Dublin under the name Penneys – the name it still trades under in Ireland. Primark's latest results show no sign of growth slipping: profits jumped by more than a quarter to £298m in the six months to the start of March, while the company rang through sales worth £2.3bn – up 14% up on last year.
But Primark's success in feeding shoppers' appetite for throwaway fashion has come under increasing scrutiny since the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh, which claimed the lives of 1,133 garment workers and left more than 2,500 injured. The Primark label was among 28 western brands found in the rubble, as well as the UK's Bonmarché, Canada's Loblaw and Spain's Mango. Primark has paid more than any other retailer into a UN-backed compensation scheme, but on the first anniversary of the disaster this week the fund has raised only $15m (£9m), well short of its $40m target.
Anna McMullen of the Labour Behind the Label campaign said Primark had been engaged in the compensation process, but needed to rethink its business model. "They are driving a fast fashion agenda that has a negative effect on workers' rights around the world. The way that they and a lot of their main competitors are driving down prices to seek ever cheaper places and ever lower wages … to make the price of their product cheaper has had a really negative effect on the whole industry."
"Now they are entering the US market I can imagine that is only going to exacerbate the problem. It is all well and good to be involved in clearing up the mess, but it is as important to be a retailer that tries to drive change as well through normal business practice."
Weston said Primark had now carried out structural surveys on factories it used in Bangladesh and had a team in the country to monitor conditions for workers producing its clothes.
He said: "Fire risk remains an issue everywhere, so does the payment of overtime and bullying of staff," however, he said: "We have learned plenty of lessons after Rana Plaza, I hope the rest of the industry has too."
Shares in ABF were up almost 9% to £29.63 on Wednesday as investors eyed up entry into the huge US market, as well as the profits bonanza.
Maureen Hinton, retail analyst at Conlumino, said Primark was highly likely to succeed in America. "Young fashion is global now. The US tended to be quite conservative in fashion. I think that has changed because of the global access in fashion and entertainment."
"The main point about Primark is its price positioning. It is not going in as just another young fashion brand. It is going in as a young fashion brand with a very defined price edge on competitors that sets it apart. But it has all the trappings of the big stores and the feel of a more expensive fashion brand. I am sure that the likes of [US rival] Forever 21 are a bit worried."
She also pointed out that Primark had not exhuasted its prospects for expansion in Europe. "Primark has got potential to become a global fashion brand. It is at the early stages, if you compare it to the likes of Inditex and H&M, but there is potential." It is also likely that Primark harbours ambitions beyond the US: "I am sure China is probably on their list," Hinton said.
Tesco The UK's biggest supermarket opened on the west coast with great fanfare in 2007. It was forced to beat a retreat five years later after running up more than £1.5bn in losses and investment costs.
M&S Offloaded US grocer King's in 2006 to focus on its ailing British business. That was the second retreat for M&S, which lost two-thirds of its investment when it sold the Brooks Brothers clothing chain in 2001.
HMV Sold its last US outlet in 2004. It had been overambitious and never made a profit from its expensive stores.
Sainsbury's Sold its US chain Shaw's as it struggled to expand and compete.
WH Smith built up a portfolio of stores in airports and hotels but sold them after the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001.
Laura Ashley Sold its entire US chain for $1 in 1999 after a string of profit warnings caused by over-ambitious expansion.
Kate Moss's Topshop collection hits shelves next week, and this exclusive video gives an insight into the creative process: think poring over moodboards, giving Uncle Phil a hug and issuing some very Mossy compliments. "Ooh, it's gorge," and, "It's quite a number," are our favourites. Also, while watching this video, we worked out who Kate Moss's voice doppelgänger is: the similarly husky actor Gemma Arterton . So that's one mystery solved
When Cara Delevingne told Vogue that one of her favourite apps was the newly released Asap54 – which uses visual-recognition technology to identify clothes – it was a PR shot in the arm for the new player in an area where competition to become the definitive technology is rife.
Snap Fashion in the UK, Style-Eyes from Ireland and Slyce in Canada are just a few of the companies that are using elaborate software to allow shoppers to take a picture of clothing on their smartphone and then be linked to a retailer where they can buy that piece or something similar.
Image-recognition software, where algorithms are used to identify and match one image with another, has been used in security and marketing for a number of years, and the move into fashion is seen as one of the first steps in the widespread commercialisation of the technology.
Jenny Griffiths started the groundwork for what would become Snap Fashion during her degree at the University of Bristol where she graduated in 2009. Launched during London fashion week in September 2012, it notched up 250,000 users in its first year.
When a picture is taken of a shoe or a piece of clothing, the software – on a desktop or mobile – analyses it by looking at the colour, pattern and shape, and tries to find a match on an existing database of products from 170 retailers ranging from New Look to Harrods. Another app called ColourPop matches products solely by colour.
"I think it is really fascinating but also someone's job to push technology into consumer spaces because we are wasting the tools [smartphones] we are carrying around every day," said Griffiths. Snap Fashion has created an app for Westfield shopping centres that lets shoppers upload a picture and then receive suggestions from the ranges in stock.
Mark Hughes, who has worked in image recognition for 10 years, is a co-founder of Dublin-based Style-Eyes, which has attracted about 65,000 users since it launched last year. Users take a picture of what they want to find, draw an outline round it and the image is matched against a database of 1.5m pieces of clothing, shoes and handbags. Suggestions of where they can buy something similar across 600 shops are shown.
"If someone matches a very expensive dress, the chances are they will not be able to afford it but what we intend to do is bring back similar ones that might be in the price range so you can filter all the results with what your intended range is – [for example] 'Find me something like that that is less than £200'," said Hughes.
Both firms make commission when items are bought via their sites – Snap Fashion makes 5-15% and Style-Eyes 5-12%. Style-Eyes says it receives up to 15 pence each time a user clicks through to a retailer. Both say just over one third of searches result in users going through to a retailer's website.
Although there are numerous players in the field, one industry commentator from a fashion retailer said no single company has managed to reach the tipping point that will make it the standard technology for consumers and brands to use. Technological glitches can happen when the various programmes cannot recognise clothing because of a lack of distinguishing features and no one yet claims a 100% success rate.
"Fashion, from a technical perspective, is very difficult for image recognition mainly because clothes change because of what way someone is sitting or what direction you are taking it [the picture]. With standard image-recognition technology now, it works really well for static objects – the front of a box of cornflakes or the front of a big building – it never really changes, the structure remains the same. That is almost a solved problem but with fashion it is a lot more difficult," said Hughes.
Griffiths does not believe a 100% success rate is possible. "Sometimes you have that experience when you Google something and you say 'actually that is not what I am looking for' and you have to try a different search term. So just the nature of search is you are not going to get it right 100% of the time. It is all about getting the user to manage it when they get the wrong result to getting them to the right one," she said.
Cortexica, a London-based firm, uses its FindSimilar software to build image-recognition facilities for retailers such as Zalando in Germany where shoppers upload images and are redirected to stock items.
Iain McCready, chief executive of Cortexica, said the rapid development of technology will enable clothes to be identified from video within two generations of iPhones. Eight computer scientists in the staff of 20 at Cortexica are constantly updating the software, which was initially developed by Imperial College London.
So far the software has largely been aimed at women's fashion – the largest part of the market –but it is expected men will soon feature. Style-Eyes hopes to expand to the US in the summer, and Cortexica is already setting up there.
Griffiths says there is not a lot of difference between various visual search companies' products and expects one to emerge as the dominant technology in the future.
"I like to think we are close to the tipping point as an industry and I like to think we are leading. I think it will be one company that does [succeed] because I don't think consumers will be bothered downloading a load of visual search apps and test them out for themselves," she said.
Style-Eyes uses a technique called "machine learning" where a computer is trained in the same way as a human. By showing the computer thousands of images of clothes, shoes and handbags, the computer distinguishes between them.
A fingerprinting system, where a digital code is created for each item using visually distinctive characteristics such as colour, shape and pattern is then used to categorise each one for search and comparison across a database of products.
Algorithms that Snap Fashion's Jenny Griffiths created at the University of Bristol to identify colour, pattern and shape are still used today although are now 100 times faster.
I now know the answer to the question that's haunted me ever since I began investigating the true cost of fast fashion. How many people would it take to be killed in the supply chain for fashionable, low-cost garments before any of us actually gave a damn? Ahead of the first anniversary of the catastrophic collapse of the Rana Plaza complex in Bangladesh, I can tell you the number must be more than 1,133. Because this is the Rana Plaza death toll and yet the biggest fast-fashion brands have had, arguably, their best year yet.
You'll remember Rana Plaza because news crews surrounded the terrible scene for a few days. Some 2,500 were also injured and many await compensation; at the last count the pot stood at just £9m, well short of the £24m needed. We heard the desperate plight of some of the cheapest workers on the planet, as they were interviewed while trapped beneath the rubble.
I promise you I'm not naive enough to think capitalist markets dish out any form of poetic justice, but I suppose I imagined there would be more pause for thought. All in all, 28 western brands were identified as using Rana Plaza, but labour rights organisations were careful not to let the wider network of brands off the hook. "Any brand could've been producing in Rana Plaza," an expert told me.
It turns out that fast-fashion brands haven't just enjoyed a lucky escape in the form of business as usual but in many cases have been rewarded by spectacular growth. The garment and textile industry, worth more than $3tn per year and producing around 80bn new garments a year – whether we need them or not – is booming – and fast fashion is booming the most.
Fast fashion is the merchandising phenomenon that has built up steam over the past 15 years and now dominates our wardrobes and high streets. It ripped up the traditional fashion calendar (the period from conceptualising a piece to delivery into store) and pulverised lead times. Famously it was Inditex-owned Zara that really broke the mould, bringing in a super-responsive timetable in the form of some 12,000 new styles each year. It is now every brand's goal to be as quick – and cheap – as Zara.
This means that outsourcing hotspots like Bangladesh – now second only to China in the "cut, make and trim" (CMT) clothes-making process – with a surplus of cheap (mainly female) labour, is now engaged in produced fashion when at best it has capacity for basic garments with longer lead times. The pressure is extraordinary and is shouldered by the most vulnerable and exploited in the chain: garment workers such as those in Rana Plaza sent back into a collapsing building to finish an urgent order.
Despite the environmental footprint (from cotton production to dyeing and spinning and finishing a single garment) and the human capital, clothes are made and sold as perishable goods. Generation Y-ers have never known anything else. It's not surprising top retailers advise their design teams that mid-priced clothing only has a lifespan of five weeks in the average wardrobe. That makes £4 T-shirts and £10 jeans disposable.
The markets love this business model, which is precisely why fast fashion is winning. Investors and analysts are appreciative of its transformation from a slightly bumbling industry two decades ago, characterised by slow growth and over capacity, to a lean fighting machine where the top brands are hyper aggressive and expanding like mad. The revenues of H&M, Inditex and Fast Retailing (owner of Uniqlo) are all expected to surge, in the months ahead but the real star is Primark. Not six months after producing at Rana Plaza on that ill-fated day, its figures were described by city analysts as "remarkable".
The coffers of fast-fashion brands do not swell by themselves, of course. In the hours after Rana Plaza, global activists were dissuaded (rightly, I still think) from a boycott of the brands associated with those kinds of factories. Boycotts are out of fashion because they hurt the very people that they are designed to help; in this case some 4 million members of the CMT army that are dependent on fast-fashion production in Bangladesh. As analyst Dr Maximilian Martin puts it in his recent report on the industry, Creating Sustainable Apparel Value Chains: "Arguments that consumers should shop less are voiced every once in a while, but evidence shows that consumption will not decelerate, absent a major war occurring." I honestly think that such is our addiction to fast fashion that many of us would put on a flak jacket and run the risk.
Weirdly, it remains heretical to suggest we should pay more for clothes or that the fast-fashion brands have a case to answer. The industry carries a number of get-out-of-jail-free cards, but one of the most effective has been the idea that these brands democratise fashion, bringing the consumer unparallelled value. We've fallen for this hook, line and sinker. Honestly, from some of the rhetoric, you'd think that some fashion retailers were running food banks not flogging millions of units of disposable clothes. Closely allied to this is the idea that they are all about development and opportunity, facilitating an industrial revolution in Bangladesh and other developing economies. And although Bangladesh has all its eggs, and GDP, in the ready-made-garment industry basket, we need to assess carefully real worker opportunities. Besides, if development really were at the heart of proceedings, the brands would act very differently.
Elements of the industry are already referring to the "Bangladesh blip", eyeing new places to produce, including Burma. But unless the business model, predicated on a form of slavery, is forced to change, there will be another Rana Plaza in the future.
But I can't give up. Rana Plaza has to stand for something. Thursday 24, the first anniversary, has been designated Fashion Revolution Day by a coalition of activists from all around the world. Consumers must take some sort of stand. The fast-fashion industry must be shown it doesn't have it all completely sewn up.
We Are What We Wear: Unravelling fast fashion and the collapse of Rana Plaza by Lucy Siegle & Jason Burke is published by Guardian Shorts (ebook, £1.99/$2.99)
Space is so short in the immense warehouses where Kopenhagen Fur, the world's largest fur auction house, runs its business, that boxes of mink skins now fill up rooms designed for inspecting furs or sorting them into different grades and colours.
"This is the biggest auction we have ever had ever, so all of the skins normally put into boxes in the basement are piled up here instead," explains press officer Nina Brønden Jakobsen.
The sight of more than 10m mink skins crammed into a facility the size of 14 football pitches is hard to forget. The more recently arrived skins, each dried stiff and just under half a metre long, are layered in metal-grilled trolleys that tower over your head, creating a wall of tiny faces, each with a barcode stapled between the eyes. The smell, intense and musky, lingers long after you leave.
Twenty years after five models, including Naomi Campbell, told the world "I'd rather go naked than wear fur" for a Peta (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) campaign, the industry is in the final stages of an unprecedented boom. Last season was a record for the auction house, with 21m skins sold for a total $2.4bn (£1.4bn) by the time the final auction ended in September.
An advert in the Economist's 28 March edition by the International Fur Federation caused protests from anti-fur activists. But its strapline – "the simple fact is: the global fur trade is valued at more than $40bn" – underlined starkly just how little their campaigning has done to curb the industry since Peta's campaign was launched in 1994.
The main reason why it failed is clear to see in Copenhagen. Up the stairs from the inspection rooms, in the auction house's dining hall, sit hundreds of Chinese buyers, eating soy-soaked eggs, dim sum, pigs' ears and other oriental favourites. "We've had to divide the cafe into different regions of China, because they don't want to sit with each other," Brønden Jakobsen explains. "We have had to hire Chinese chefs to help us with things. They make thousands of dim sum and pigs' ears and all kinds of different specialities."
Chinese business people now represent more than half of the 600-plus buyers at the auction, some of them low-level operatives in brightly coloured track suits, others multimillionaires clad in pricey designer clothing.
According to Torben Nielsen, Kopenhagen Fur's chief executive, the Chinese fur bubble has only this season started to burst.
"In a way it was a surprise that we didn't have the big drop last year, because to me it was obvious that the whole fur market was in the middle of a bubble, and that the bubble would either increase or explode," he says.
He ticks off a long list of new shopping centres that have opened in China over the past couple of years, all selling fur, ending with Harbin, a city on the Russian border, which opened three centres this year alone, adding 1,200 shops. "If every shop needs to sell 600 coats a year, and each coat needs 35 mink skins, that's something like 50% of the total Danish production right there," he says.
Mink skins reached a record average price of $102 (£61), or $3,500 for a fur coat in September. Since then, they have plummeted to $54 as it has dawned on the Chinese buyers that they will struggle to sell on their vast storehouses full of stock.
Yang Zhenyuan, a young man whose family factory in north-east China takes in a staggering 200,000 skins a year, argues that many Chinese buyers will soon exit the market. "There are a lot of people who just entered this in the last year, and they bought the skins at quite high prices," he says. "They didn't know that the market price was going to keep going down like this, so they're already leaving the business."
For HW Kim, a buyer from South Korea inspecting a lot of brown velvet mink, this can only be a good thing. "The price is good, but the Korea market isn't so good," he says. "So we buy." He checks each skin by pulling it hard from each end with a snap, running his fingers over the fur, and then shaking it.
For now, though, Chinese buyers are still here, and Kopenhagen Fur, with its 60% global market share, continues to reap the benefits. Emile Connor, a London-based fur trader, thinks this is a shame. Only a few decades ago the fur market was centred on Garlick Hill, next to Mansion House tube station in London, the site of Beaver House, the headquarters of the Hudson's Bay Company. "Right up until the 1970s, it was the biggest auction in the world," he says. "All of the benefit could have gone to the UK." But you don't have to spend long watching the quick-fire bidding in the auction room to see the important role the British still play.
"Most of the biggest brokers here are British, and most of them still keep their stock in the UK," says Connor, who bought the most expensive lot at the peak of the market in September. At peak the auctioneers were selling £3,000-worth of fur a second, their hammers clacking down to signify a sale almost continuously.
Frank Zilberkweit, a major British buyer who owns the British fur designer Hockley, is keen to stress how little long-term impact the UK and US anti-fur campaign has had internationally. "When the anti-fur campaign was at its peak, production fell to 22 million mink worldwide," he points out. "This year it's 80 million. You can talk to Peta, you can talk to these anti-fur campaigners, but the fact is that many of their models from the 1990s are now modelling fur."
Nielsen, Kopenhagen Fur's chief executive, agrees that Britain's anti-fur farming law and the UK "public morality" which deters most people from wearing fur is "not relevant at all" for the industry. Nonetheless, like every other spokesman for the trade, he launches almost automatically into an attack on the campaigners.
"In Great Britain you're quite uncritical and you swallow everything they come up with," he says. For him, being an anti-fur campaigner is one step from fascism. "If you want to treat animals like people, then you can go the other way and treat people like animals," he argues. "And that's what they did in Nazi Germany. The first animal rights law was passed through the German parliament in 1936."
One way Britain is relevant to the fur market, he concedes, is through its fashion industry. "If it's out of fashion in Europe, it will be out of fashion in China," he says. "The fashion is still created in Europe, and if you look at Europe there's a lot of fur around."
Fashion is one of the fur industry's greatest recent successes. The likes of Dolce & Gabbana, Alexander McQueen, Prada, Louis Vuitton, Fendi and Tom Ford are all including fur in their recent collections. Yang, with his black baseball jacket, designer glasses and silver fleur-de-lis earring, knows what is fashionable in Europe. But he argues that for now fur is a status symbol in China rather than a fashion item.
"Mink is a symbol of who you are, it's a symbol of status, and that's why a lot of middle-class people are buying fur. Everybody wants to look wealthy," he says. As for young, fashionable Chinese like himself, he personally can't see them embracing it. "The young people, they aren't our target group," he says. "The Chinese are more and more well-educated today, so the awareness of animal rights and human rights is getting bigger. The way they kill minks in China is very cruel. That's why a lot of the new generation don't wear fur."
A new campaign to change the way we think about shopping will be launched on Thursday, one year after the garment trade disaster at the Rana Plaza in Bangladesh. Backed by MPs including the shadow consumer minister, Stella Creasy, and Labour's international development spokeswoman, Alison McGovern, as well as fashion-trade insiders such as Mary Portas and Caryn Franklin, the campaign was set up by Carry Somers, an ethical-trade entrepreneur. It aims to build connections throughout the fashion supply chain, linking the cotton farmer, the dyer and the seamstress with the consumer.
Surveys have shown that two-thirds of fashion firms are unclear about the full production process of the clothes they manufacture and have no plans to engage with customers' ethical concerns. Fashion Revolution Day hopes to change that by encouraging people to put pressure on stores by sending messages through social media and other means to their favourite shops, asking: "Who makes my clothes?"
As the anniversary of the disaster approaches, campaigners are increasingly angry at the failure of some of the brands which used the Rana Plaza factory to give adequate recompense to the injured and the families of victims. Some 800 children were orphaned in the tragedy, while hundreds of others were left crippled and unable to work. The UN agency in charge of the compensation scheme revealed last week that only just over a third – £9m – of the £24m target had so far been raised.
Of the 28 brands linked to the complex at Savar, on the outskirts of Dhaka, which collapsed on 24 April last year, killing 1,133 people and injuring more than 2,500, only half have paid into the fund run by the International Labour Organisation, with some giving as little as £100,000. Brands which have not paid include Matalan, Benetton and JC Penney and there are concerns that the first round of payments – £1.2m due to go to 3,000 people – may not be made before the anniversary. Primark last week increased its contribution to around £8m and Mango has also made a payment, although it will not reveal the amount.
This week, another UK event will focus on those left in poverty by Rana Plaza. Open Vizor, War on Want, Traid, and the Rainbow Collective will premiere a new documentary, Tears in the Fabric, to press more brands to pay up and sign the Bangladeshi safety accord.
Film-maker Hannan Majid, of the Rainbow Collective, has spent years documenting the garment factories with co-director Richard York. "Even before Rana Plaza, there were fires and accidents all the time," he said.
This year they returned to make Tears in the Fabric, which features Razia Begum, who is raising two grandsons, orphaned when both her daughters and her son-in-law perished at Rana Plaza, leaving the boys without financial support. She is destitute and switches from shelter to shelter each night, with eight-year-old Bijoi and six-year-old Parvez, while awaiting compensation. "When you make documentaries there are often moments that are inspirational, but with Rana Plaza it's hard to find," York said. "There is a strong sense in Savar that something terrible happened here. The whole town is traumatised. [The] workers that day didn't want to go into the building... they were forced in.
"It's important for people to realise why this money is needed, a whole generation of young people died and that left grandparents to bring up their kids. When Begum goes to visit her daughters' graves, they actually have to cross the rubble of the factory. You can still see all the ripped clothing of the workers and the labels from the clothes they were making for UK brands."
On 24 April, the film will have its charity premiere in London at Regent's University to raise money for the families.
Graciela Romero, international programmes director at War on Want, said: "It is scandalous that Rana Plaza victims, like Razia with her orphaned grandchildren, are struggling to survive, almost a year after the disaster.
"Mango has paid into the disaster trust fund, but not revealed how much, and Razia, the boys and others face dire hardship, while they wait for compensation.
"The lesson companies must learn from the disaster is they must not only sign the Bangladesh safety accord, but also ensure the victims do not suffer further, as brands drag their heels over providing redress."
Pressure from inside and outside Bangladesh has seen some limited improvements to workers' conditions. Two international agreements have seen inspections of garment factories begin in Bangladesh, with the first reports being published last month and revealing long lists of issues from blocked fire exits to overladen foundations and dangerous electrics. Owners are supposed to be getting financial support to make improvements but many have been complaining of confusion in the system and of not being able to access loans. They have also been talking of unnamed European buyers refusing to accept cost rises to cover the workers' pay increases, which came into effect in November.
The rise in the minimum wage, brought in after several days of strikes and protests by workers last year, was supposed to address some of the concerns about sweatshop labour but has been swallowed up in many cases by local rent rises, which came into effect at the same time.
However, investment in Bangladesh does not seem to have been affected by the global attention after Rana Plaza, and the Tazreen fire which preceded it.
Export earnings increased 12.88% year-on-year to $22bn in the first nine months of the fiscal year, on the back of the continued high demand for the country's clothing from Europe and the US. Garment exports between July and March rising 15.15% year-on-year to $18.05bn, according to the Export Promotion Bureau.
No one has yet been convicted over the collapse of the factory but last week the Bangladesh government seized properties belonging to the owner of Rana Plaza, Sohel Rana, a junior official in the ruling Awami League party, who was arrested days after the tragedy as he tried to flee into neighbouring India. He was one of around 40 people whom police said would be charged in connection with the disaster.
But the seizures came months after a high court ruling that they should be confiscated.
"We have confiscated all his properties, including the Rana Plaza land, a multi-storey tower at Savar and a big slice of land in the neighbouring district of Dhamrai," said deputy district administrator Fazal Mir.
Bangladesh is now the world's second-largest clothing producer after China. Stores including Walmart, Tesco and Carrefour, as well as the US military, source large amounts of their clothes from Bangladesh, home to around 4,500 garment factories and employing some 4 million workers.
For a very brief moment, just before daybreak, the narrow backstreets are empty. Trucks still rumble down the potholed road through the town but the last workers have long gone home, walking past the furled awnings of the market stalls, over the single footbridge, along the battered pavements, to the tenement apartments, the squalid huts, the tin-roofed homes by the fetid pond.
Then, as light comes, the silence is broken: water splashes into a bucket held under a standpipe by a child, a pressure cooker wails, someone laughs. In thousands of homes, tens of thousands of people are scooping rice and vegetables from tin bowls, packing the leftovers to eat during the long day ahead and then, hands rinsed, goodbyes said, filing out into the streets, the streams of workers uniting and then separating as they flow through the town, like blood through veins, each leading to a different factory. In the evening the flow will reverse, the pulse slower, less certain. But now, at 7.30am, it is sure and steady.
On this morning, 23 April last year and the day before the disaster, the workers at the five factories housed in the eight-storey Rana Plaza arrive as usual around 7.45am. There are 2,200 registered employees in the complex, plus those who staff the bank and the shops on the first floor. Once through the doors at the rear, they head up the narrow stairs to their workplaces: New Wave Bottoms on the second floor, Phantom Apparels on the third, Phantom Tac on the fourth, then Ether Tex and finally New Wave Style on the sixth and seventh floors. For several years now, these five companies have produced millions of items of clothing for western clients including Matalan and Primark.
Among the workers is Mahmuda Akhter. Her husband, Habibullah, works in the Phantom Tac factory a floor above, and as usual the couple have walked to work together, leaving their baby girl at home with Mahmuda's mother. They are from a small village in Pabna district 100 miles from Savar. Unusually for conservative Bangladesh, theirs is a "love marriage", not arranged by their parents. Mahmuda is 20; Habibullah, 23.
Mahmuda reaches her sewing machine and sits down. A few yards away is Shapla Begum, a supervisor working on another of the three lines, each of around 80 sewing machine operators, that constitute Phantom Apparels. Shapla is 27 and has been in Savar for five years. She, too, is a migrant. Her husband's earnings as a rickshaw puller in their village in Kurigram in the distant north were insufficient to pay for schooling for their two boys so, following other relatives, they came to Savar.
Working for Ether Tex on the fifth floor are Runarini and her two daughters. Runarini is a "helper", cleaning and carrying, as is the younger of the two girls, Preity, who is 15. The elder, 18-year-old Shamapati, a serious girl who laughs rarely, says little and works hard, is a sewing machine operator. The trio have arrived in Savar more recently than most of their colleagues and so can afford only a single room in a battered, tin-roofed shack. They hope that in time they will find something better. The open yard full of chickens and children in front of their new home reminds Preity of the fields and trees she left behind, and of the friends she misses.
But she likes Shonjit Das, the 19-year-old son of her immediate neighbour. He works in the finishing section of Ether Tex, packing the clothes to be sent off to the west, and is handsome and funny, and sometimes walks her home at the end of the day. And she knows the three women are earning many times what labouring in others' fields or cultivating their own poor, eroded land back in their village would ever have paid.
At 8am, as every morning except Sundays, in all the factories, on every floor of the Rana Plaza, the bell sounds, conversation ends and work starts.
No one is entirely sure how big the global clothing industry is, what profit it makes or how many it employs. It is estimated that $300bn worth of clothes were made by the top 10 producers in 2012, and the industry as a whole generates revenues of between $500m and $2tn. But no one really knows.
Textiles, if not garments, have always been a key element of global commerce. For more than a thousand years, trade between Europe and east Asia travelled what were known as the "silk routes". Later, the textile industry played an important role in Britain's emergence as the world's leading commercial power. There and elsewhere, the rag trade employed millions and created immense wealth, playing a key role in the transition of western nations from agrarian to industrial economies. But nothing really compares with what is happening today, either in scale or in impact. For as the west has got richer, its demand for clothes has steadily risen.
Garment-making is labour-intensive and there is often little room for savings on the textiles that are the biggest single cost. This means the price of a human being cutting, making and trimming a garment is key in the overall production costs and, of course, eventual profits. Through the 50s and 60s, producers hunted cheaper labour in east Asia – first Japan and then, in the 70s and 80s, in the so-called Asian Tiger economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan. Employment in the garment manufacturing industry in the west has declined steadily decade on decade – despite attempts to protect local industries with quota systems and tariffs. Production in newly industrialised China, as well as in Indonesia, Turkey, Mexico and India, has increased exponentially.
For the consumer, of course, this has all meant that while prices of everything else except communications have risen, clothes cost less. In 1900, 15% of a US household's income was spent on clothing. In 1950, it was still 12%. Even as late as the early 1990s, major purchases of clothing – a suit, a dress, a coat – marked a special occasion or a rite of passage. But by 2004, the total amount spent by households on clothes had dropped to just 4%. By 2010, according to the US Bureau of Labour Statistics, clothing cost the average American family only $1,700 (£1,017), 2.8% of their income. And for that money the consumer gets much more. Cheap no longer means nasty; it just means affordable. In 1997, the average woman in the UK bought 19 items of clothing a year; in 2007, she bought 34.
The big bang in recent textile history came in a few short years at the beginning of the last decade, when various factors coincided to change radically the nature and scale of garment production around the planet. One was the end of the quota system put in place 30 years earlier to protect western industries. A second was a new degree of conformity of tastes across the world, allowing greater uniformity of product and bigger volumes of single designs. A third was "fast fashion".
Fast fashion is at once a mode of production, a strategy and a style. It grew out of the efforts of the major western brands, which dominate garment sales, to find new ways to coax further demand out of a saturated market. Though soon adopted by retailers across the world, it was pioneered by Inditex, the giant Spanish company that owns Zara. It depends on a series of mutually reinforcing innovations: an accelerated cycle of design, production and supply that means trends can be spotted, copied and sold within weeks; no "seasons", but a year-round product flow; low stock levels in stores to encourage rapid, repeated impulse purchases; a supply chain that can respond when shop staff notice that shoppers suddenly seem to like lace, or blue, or diamond patterns, or a particular stitching on their socks, or whatever; huge numbers of young adults for whom shopping is the primary leisure activity; a new obsession with celebrities, fuelled by social media and the internet; and, of course, low prices.
Sourcing has thus become a complex operation in which scores of different factors – cost, location, eventual market, risk, competition, styling, quality and so on – are computed to decide on an eventual place of production. Basic clothing – socks, for example – will be ordered in huge quantities with long lead times. Higher quality workmanship will be done in Europe, north Africa or, for the US market, Latin America. More fashion-led items are often needed in smaller quantities but faster. And cost, whatever the brands say, is always the prime consideration. So in this highly networked system, places where suppliers can turn around vast quantities of clothing very rapidly and very cheaply are key. Places where you can order, say, 500,000 basic shirts, paying $6 per piece, and they will be shipped on time, with minimum fuss, and be in stores, retailing for $30, within, at the outside, two to three months. Places such as Bangladesh.
Mahmuda and her husband are standing in a crowd of workers outside the Rana Plaza complex. They have been there for nearly 40 minutes and now 2,000 people are massed around the building. Shapla is there, too, and Preity, her mother and sister, and Shonjit, her 19-year-old friend. There is a low murmur of discontent and concern.
It is 24 April. The previous day, shortly after work started, three cracks were found in the reinforced concrete pillars that support the eight-storey building. An engineer sent by the Savar municipality declared the building unsafe, work in the five factories was halted and everyone was sent home.
Mahmuda's job is to stitch seams and pockets. It is one of the tougher of the 60 or 70 separate operations needed to make a pair of trousers. She is supposed to stitch 120 pairs an hour, 10 hours a day, six days a week, 50 weeks of the year. That's 360,000 annually. She earns 8,000BDT (£60) each month. Her husband, a quality controller, earns a little more.
Each line in Mahmuda's factory is watched over by three supervisors. Shapla is one of only a handful who are women. She is paid 10,000BDT (£75) for monitoring the 15 workers and five helpers on her section, but gets no overtime. The line's target and their progress is indicated on a board hung on the wall above the output bins where the finished clothes are dropped. The workers get an hour off for lunch. The boss "is a well-mannered person" and there are no complaints, or at least not from Shapla's section.
If an order is delivered late, accepted practice in much of the industry is for the buyer to deduct 5% for each week of delay. The buyers already have political unrest, wildcat strikes and blockades to deal with; they cannot afford to risk losing further days of production.
And that is what they are facing now.
Which may explain how, somehow, overnight, the cracks that shut the factory the day before have become less dangerous and the management has called in the workforce. The building has been inspected once more and is safe, they say. Monthly salaries are due in 10 days, but overtime, which increases most employees' salaries by between a third and a half, and means being able to pay the rent or eat properly, will be paid in the next day or so. Many of the workers are told by their managers that unless they work, they will not receive the money. What choice have we got, the workers are saying to each other. We are here to work, after all.
The managers know this. They know, too, that, as a female supervisor, Shapla is trusted more than her male counterparts, and not just by "her girls". So when they want the workers to stop shouting and calm down, and to enter the building, take their places at their machines and finish the big orders the factories are currently under pressure to complete on time, several come to her, telling her again how the building is safe, how the girls trust her, how if she doesn't go in, the girls won't either. She is uncertain, reluctant, but because at that moment it is the easiest thing to do, she gives way and goes in. And her girls follow.
Similar pressure has been put on other supervisors. They, too, reluctantly head into the building. Soon all the workers are flowing up the stairs. Mahmuda leaves her husband in the stairwell. He carries on up to his factory. She makes her way to her desk and machine on the third floor. On the fifth floor, in the Ether Tex factory, 15-year-old Preity, her mother and her sister are working by 8.30am. Preity is on her feet, moving up and down the line, clearing offcuts, bringing new needles or thread; her mother is nearby, her sister working at a sewing machine on the same line but at the opposite end of the room.
Mahmuda has time to stitch maybe two or three pieces before the lights go out, the old fans, which barely dent the heat in the factory, slow and the sewing machines stop. A power cut, frequent enough and no cause for alarm. The workers wait in the gloom, talking quietly, worried, waiting for the powerful, heavy generators installed on the roof to start up.
Moments after the generators start, sending vibrations through the building, a pillar in one corner of the Rana Plaza gives way with a loud, explosive bang. Then each storey slides sideways, tips and splits, falling in on the one below. On the third floor, the collapse is almost instantaneous, but the workers of Phantom Apparels still have time to realise what is happening.
The floor starts shaking and it is clear the building is coming down. Mahmuda starts reciting verses of the Qur'an. She staggers, falls and crawls beneath her sewing machine.
Shapla is walking down her line when the building starts to collapse. She starts running. She, too, seeks protection under a sewing machine and then everything gives way around her. She is in darkness, gasping for breath.
Two floors above, the floor inclines slowly like the deck of a sinking ship. Panicked workers rush to the two narrow exits. It is dark, there is much dust and noise. Runarini has managed to find her youngest daughter, Preity, and is now trying to get to the other end of her line where Shamapati, her eldest, was working at her machine. But the force of bodies pushes her towards the exit. She cannot hold on to Preity and fight the crowd to find Shamapati. The floor lurches, tips again and everything falls.
In the darkness after the collapse there are many voices: sobs, sustained screaming, calls for help and water, moans of pain, prayers, howls of grief. Some are trapped in total darkness, others can make out some light. Many are pinned down by huge blocks of concrete, bent iron girders, machinery. Others are entombed in small cavities. Some are alone, others with colleagues or strangers from other floors. Shapla can move her hand but nothing else. Mahmuda can see the sky through a gap in the wall several yards away. Runarini and Preity are trapped together and they can hear voices, but not Shamapati's. They shout her name, but there is no response.
Outside there is chaos. Dazed survivors stand immobile in a huge, roiling cloud of dust. It takes time for Dhaka's ramshackle emergency services to arrive, so hundreds of locals clamber over and through the rubble, tearing at the concrete blocks and mangled metal with their hands. Soon corpses are lined up on the ground, limbs limp and twisted, as if they had fallen from a great height. Mahmuda crawls towards the light, finds herself only a few metres from the ground and clambers down. She cannot see her husband.
Shapla waits longer for rescue. She can hear sirens and shouts outside. They are hammering and drilling the slab of concrete above her. She finds her throat so dry from screaming that she cannot talk when the rescuers find her. She is unaware that she has made any noise whatsoever. It takes two hours to free her.
Runarini and Preity crawl together towards a shaft of light and are lifted from the rubble by mid-afternoon. The ruined building is now surrounded by police and soldiers, and heavy lifting equipment is arriving. There are electric saws and jackhammers, and lines of ambulances. There is no sign of Shamapati.
Bangladesh is the original "basket case", a term coined by Henry Kissinger, the US secretary of state, to describe the country immediately after its violent secession from Pakistan in 1971. Up to 3 million died in that conflict, a civil war that was simultaneously a war of independence, and its wounds remain livid. Famine, flood, a massive programme of nationalisation, political instability and further violence crippled the new nation's economy. But, despite the continual challenges, the textiles and garment industry prospered. Investment and advice from Korean companies helped and, by the end of the 1990s, the industry had somehow weathered destructive storms – political, economic and meteorological.
In 2004, when the protectionist quotas that had been imposed to protect western jobs 30 years earlier expired, many in Bangladesh were apprehensive. But the industry boomed. "Business just took off," says Rubana Huq, now managing director of garment manufacturers the Mohammadi Group. In 2004 there were 2 million workers in Bangladesh's 4,000 factories, with exports worth $6bn. Nine years later, there were twice as many in 5,600 registered establishments, sending $21bn worth of clothes overseas.
Competition from abroad when the quotas disappeared meant "prices dipped", Huq says, but the demand from Europe and the US was so great that she and others "just kept on building". If wages in Bangladesh remained the lowest in the world, land prices in central Dhaka, where most of the garment businesses were based, rose so fast that new investors sought space on the margins of the city where hastily reclaimed wetlands could still be bought relatively cheaply. In Savar, Gazipur, Ashulia and elsewhere around Dhaka, hundreds of factories went up every year. There was little or no planning or regulation.
"People were not much concerned by building codes or quality of material," admits Emdadul Islam, the long-serving chief engineer of Rajuk, Dhaka's development authority. Monitoring of environmental impact, construction quality and permits for the millions flowing in from rural areas were almost nonexistent.
Inevitably, people started to die. In April 2005, a factory in Savar called Spectrum collapsed, killing 64 workers. The dead were making clothes for western retailers. Poor cement was a likely cause – builders often charge for better-quality materials than they deliver – or water from a nearby canal may have washed out foundations. For a short period there was talk of a crackdown on unsafe buildings, but even though a second factory in northern Dhaka collapsed a year later, killing 21, the fuss faded. As the recession hit western economies in 2008 and 2009, brands forced down prices even further as they negotiated with suppliers. Those in Bangladesh who demanded government intervention in one of the country's few economic success stories made little headway when dozens of garment factory owners sat in parliament and powerful industry bodies had the ear of policymakers. The boom continued. Bangladesh, the world's 76th biggest exporter of clothes in 1980, was the eighth biggest in 2006, and by 2013 was second only to China.
Over the decade, prompted by a string of reports of child labour and other abuses in factories around the world, the brands had set up systems to monitor pay and working conditions in their supply chain. Some organised their own inspections, many brought in contractors. But executives did not think to undertake structural surveys of the buildings where their clothes were made. Instead, they relied on the corrupt, poorly paid, underqualified, undermanned local authorities. This, senior executives at major European brands now admit, was a mistake. Others use stronger terms. From 2005 to March 2013, fires killed an estimated 600, but no more buildings collapsed.
The Dhaka suburb of Gulshan is only 15 miles from Savar. Rickshaws negotiate its quiet, tree-lined streets with relative ease and there are many good restaurants. In the late morning, coffee shops are busy with staff from international NGOs and the UN. This is where the Bangladesh operations of many big European and US brands are based, as are the larger buyers who often act as their intermediaries locally.
The offices of H&M occupy a new five-storey block. There is nothing to distinguish the building, inside or out, from its counterparts in any western capital. On the walls of brightly lit meeting rooms – each named after garment manufacturing zones around the city – are posters of laughing, thin, beautiful young Europeans of varying ethnic backgrounds wearing the bright, cheery, fashionable clothes of the company's brands. A notice tells staff: "Your passionate focus towards quality will make it happen."
H&M, which has 3,000 stores in around 50 markets worldwide and sales of £13bn in 2012 (making a profit of £1.6bn), has been in Bangladesh since the early 80s and is one of the biggest foreign brands working in the country. The Swedish retailer did not have any contracts with the factories working in Rana Plaza, nor any link to the building, and has long been at the forefront of efforts to find a way to improve pay and working conditions in the industry. These have intensified since last April's tragedy, but "there's a lot more to the country for us than low wages and low costs", says Anna Gedda, the company's social sustainability manager.
Executives from other big brands all make similar points when talking about the Rana Plaza collapse, even if their companies have been less proactive than H&M. They express their shock and grief, say they have long recognised the problems in Bangladesh, point out that the chaotic environment of a developing world city means many issues are partly beyond their control (though, they admit, still their responsibility), and downplay the significance of cheap labour in the decision to locate production in the country. They also emphasise the importance of the garment industry to the Bangladeshi economy and the social transformation brought about by the employment of millions of young, rural women, albeit in poorly paid, monotonous jobs. One company spokesman points out that otherwise "these women would be in the fields, in ship-breaking or shrimp farming, working as maids". Now, he says, they are breadwinners, independent, and often with the means to pay for their kids to go to school.
H&M's Gedda says: "The best way for the country is for brands like H&M to stay there." This is something one hears frequently: from the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association, senior ministers, international trade unionists, independent economists and urban development specialists in Dhaka. It's also what all the workers say. Everyone agrees that the Rana Plaza collapse was a "wake-up call" that will be "a turning point", but they all say the industry and the brands must remain. "If there is a pull-out, it will be a catastrophe for Dhaka," says Professor Nazrul Islam, of the local Centre for Urban Studies.
The result, after a series of fairly acrimonious meetings in Geneva and Paris last year, is three separate initiatives: the Accord, which involves more than 150 largely European brands; the Alliance, set up by US brands; and a joint effort by the UN and the Bangladeshi government. Between them, these three are meant to bring all the factories in Bangladesh into a system of auditing and inspection that will enforce agreed standards. They will also, theoretically, ensure structural surveys. The brands will help pay for improvements needed by their suppliers to meet the new standards – through grants in the case of the legally binding Accord and soft loans for the less constraining Alliance – and there are also provisions for strengthening the country's underdeveloped and highly politicised unions. There is a separate process designed to establish how much compensation will be paid – the total could be more than $40m – to the Rana Plaza victims. Many brands have refused to become involved and international trade unionists admit the current initiatives have many flaws. Nonetheless, they say, taken together the package represents "an unprecedented chance to put all this right".
Some specialists even hope that initiatives will provide a model not just in Bangladesh but in Cambodia, Indonesia, Latin America and even the emerging new markets for production such as Burma and Ethiopia. The risk, of course, is that attention will fade, as it did after the 2005 Spectrum factory collapse. "This is Plan B," says Srinivas Reddy, the Bangladesh country director of the International Labour Organisation. Plan A led to Rana Plaza. There is no Plan C.
If, from afar, the world of the garment workers and the garment industry in Bangladesh is one of stark contrasts, up close it is one of shadows and ambiguity. Mohammadpur, for example, is a designated slum that is also a booming new neighbourhood on the western margins of a city that has no legal boundaries. A few decades ago it was wetland like Savar or Gazipur. By the 90s, the marshes had been replaced by rows of wooden sheds on stilts full of half-starved labourers and their families. Now it is changing again as Dhaka, a city of at least 15 million, gets steadily less poor. The wooden shacks have been replaced by cement apartments and rooms. There are tea stalls with TVs tuned to the Discovery Channel, schools, shops and a refurbished mosque. "It's better than where I came from… At least there's a chance of making a living here, of a better life, perhaps," says Salahuddin, a 27-year-old labourer who fled poverty, debt and failing yields on a tiny parcel of land to bring his family to the city.
But if it is possible to see incremental and uneven progress in Dhaka, there is also misery, overcrowding, disease, crime and failing infrastructure. Police rarely venture into Mohammadpur. A fire in a garment factory here killed seven in 2013 and fear of such accidents is one reason Salahuddin's wife, Juleika, prefers poorly paid work as a maid. The dirt roads are strewn with rubbish. Water from standpipes is sold at extortionate prices by landlords in league with local politicians and bureaucrats. There is the perpetual risk of eviction and demolition. In the brutal summer heat, the concrete boxes where entire families live are furnaces.
Then there is Bangladesh. It is one of the "Next 11" nations seen by Goldman Sachs as having the potential to take off as major economies. Its development indicators have risen steadily, to the point where most are now better than those in neighbouring India. But again, if the rate of population growth has dropped in recent years, it is still high. Flooding and extreme weather events linked to climate change threaten disasters in the future in this low-lying land. The flow from the countryside to the cities is unlikely to slow soon, and, as the effluent from the factories contaminates the once pristine waterways, so toxic politics and endemic graft poison public life.
And what of the garment industry's role in all of this? Along with remittances from workers overseas, the industry is the only major foreign currency earner for the country. Wages for workers have risen since the disaster – the minimum monthly salary for an entry-level worker is now 5,300BDT (about £40) a month – but so have rents, and no one can pretend a family can live on a single salary. Factory conditions might have improved in the last decade, but even without the 1,130 who died in Rana Plaza, the toll from fires and other accidents would be intolerable. Along with the 4 million directly employed by the industry, economists say there are another 4 million people whose livelihoods depend on the internal demand it generates. If half of these 8 million people support a family of five, then around a sixth of the population depends on people several thousands miles away buying cheap clothes that they don't need.
And that means this world of ambiguity is one the consumer inhabits, too. Many debate where the blame lies for tragedies such as Rana Plaza, and argue over who has the responsibility to prevent them in the future. The owners of the factories? Those who let the buildings that house the workshops? The crooked builders? The bent bureaucrats? The government? The intermediaries who do so much of the buying? The brands?
Some western brands implicitly accept a degree of moral responsibility, even if their lawyers are careful to make sure their legal liability is strictly limited. "People portray companies as evil by definition, and in many aspects they are. But often times a company is forced to behave in certain ways by consumer behaviour. If no one buys your product, you are out of business. Consumers take decisions for companies, but often [they] don't, which means they don't care," says one senior executive at a big European high street brand.
Though there is little statistical evidence of any direct correlation between bad publicity about social issues and sales – it would, experts say, be almost impossible to establish such a link anyway – big companies do their own research to understand the impact on sales of events such as the Rana Plaza collapse.
"Companies do very precise work on this to understand the consumers and what level of quality they are willing to pay for, and [it shows that] a large number of consumers prefer inexpensive over respect for human rights or environment," the executive says. "After all, if you buy a pair of jeans at $9.99, what are you really expecting about the working conditions of those who made them or even just the environment in which they live?"
Mahmuda eventually found her husband's body, intact but for a broken nose, laid out in the makeshift morgue set up in the grounds of a local school. It took some days for her to realise that her husband was not going to walk through the door of their small home in Savar. She returned to her village to bury him, but life was as hard there as it had ever been and she was soon back in Savar. Eight months later, Mahmuda started work at another garment factory, less than 300m from where the Rana Plaza complex stood. She passes the site of the collapse – the rubble scraped away, a trough of filthy water, scattered bolts of filthy cloth, a stench of decayed matter – every day. "I tell myself if one building has collapsed, it doesn't mean they all will," she says. "I can't be scared. If I am scared, how will I feed my family? I tell myself if one building has collapsed, it doesn't mean they all will."
Runarini, however, has still not fully understood that her daughter will not come home. Shamapati's remains have never been found. It is possible that the 18-year-old's corpse may have been buried with 250 others, all unidentified, in the chaotic aftermath of the collapse. There is even a chance that, unrecognisable and untested, it may have been given to the wrong family. Bangladesh's only DNA testing facility was unable to cope with so many dead, and officials admit mistakes were made.
Preity still dreams of her village and misses her friends and school. Now she hopes to set up a tailoring shop when she is older, with help from an NGO. "My mum cries all the time," she says. She misses her sister, too, and Shonjit, who sometimes walked her back from the factory. He was killed, too.
When Shonjit's father, Satyadip, who still works as a loader in a nearby factory, heard of the collapse, he ran to the site. "I was crazy. I tried to tear away the stones with my hands. For 13 days I went there, round all the hospitals, to find him, to find my son. I held on to my hope, but then we found him and he was not with us any more."
Rubana Huq, managing director of the Mohammadi Group, travelled to the site of the collapse when she heard what had happened, though she has no link to the factories there. She set up a small relief operation and spent days handing out water and food to rescue workers. "It made me think differently about the workers; that it is another life, like mine," she says.
Shapla has seen only one of the 20 girls she watched over since the day of the tragedy. She saw her, fleetingly, at a bus stop. She has heard news of a second. The rest she believes are dead. Now, when she sees their children, she feels "like a criminal". "I was the one who got them to go in. I was the one they followed. I think about it all the time."
Shapla has found a job at another factory but, due to her back injuries, as a sewing-machine operator, not a supervisor. She would prefer to do "any other job", but the only alternative is manual labour on construction sites, building new factories and homes for workers, and she needs 10,000BDT (£75) to get her son into a local school.
Most of the victims have received money – some from the government, some from industry bodies, some from one or two brands, such as Primark, that have unilaterally decided to make payments while most other brands, the government, global unions and industry bodies argue over the level of compensation they will eventually pay out.
Every evening, Mahmuda, Satyadip, Shapla and approximately 4 million others in and around Dhaka stop work, exchange a few words with their colleagues and head home. They go out on to the broken, crowded streets, a stream of workers that flows together, then divides again round the stalls, the beggars, the lines of overloaded trucks, the packed buses immobile amid the rickshaws. They are joined by streams from other factories, flowing together before splitting again into smaller streams down the narrow lanes between the tenements, until these, too, eventually divide and divide once more, and it becomes dark, and the workers are home.
• We Are What We Wear: Unravelling Fast Fashion And The Collapse Of Rana Plaza by Lucy Siegle and Jason Burke is published by Guardian Shorts (ebook, £1.99/$2.99). Visit guardianshorts.com to read an extract and buy your copy. The Shirts On Our Backs, an interactive documentary about Rana Plaza and the textile industry, is on theguardian.com/rana.
We asked people if ethical considerations affect what they buy in the wake of the clothing factory collapse last April, where more than 1,100 people died. The factory made clothes for brands including Primark, Benetton, and Mango
Victims of the Rana Plaza factory collapse died making clothes sold in western high street stores. 28 brands have been linked to the factory complex including Primark, Matalan, Benetton, Bonmarché, El Corte Inglés, and Mango.
Huge numbers of people use shopping as their primary leisure activity, and for some it is an addiction. The fast fashion industry relies on a year-round production flow, low stock levels in stores and a supply chain that responds to rapidly changing demands. 
Buying a piece of clothing was once a celebrated occasion – in 1900 15% of household income was spent on clothing, compared to 2.8% in 2010. And it's not because we're spending more on a few quality items, in 1997 the average woman bought 19 pieces of clothing, and 10 years later 34.
Do you know where your clothes are made? Did the Rana Plaza Complex change your shopping habits?
What needs to happen to make us more ethical about our fashion choices? Are businesses or consumers responsible? And how can this be achieved? Does it require a transparent supply chain, or should consumers boycott companies known for unethical practices?
We asked people in Granary Square, London, home to Central Saint Martins college, if how clothes were made affected their purchases – here's what they said
Let us know by adding your comment to the thread. We'll add a selection above the line.
Chris Hatherill, head of the creative science agency Super/Collider , has worn head-to-toe grey since about 2010; his most prized possessions are his Nike Dunk Hi AC (Grey Perf Pack) trainers, which have grey uppers, laces and soles . Wearing them, he says, 'I look like I've been dipped in grey paint.' In the picture, he wears his second-favourite trainers, a pair of Nike Air Max 90s. He describes his style as 'like a Pantone reference … It’s functional but it also gives me a distinct look without having to try too hard.' Photograph: Amelia Karlsen for AnOther
At Topshop in London's Oxford Circus, the outlook is misty. Faded varsity sweatshirts and charcoal leggings hang on the rails. Teenage girls weave in and out of the aisles dressed in grey-marl jogging bottoms. Outside, office workers charge down the pavements wearing tailored herringbone jackets over flinty cashmere jumpers, their nails lacquered in iridescent silver or understated greige.
Scroll through Pinterest, or browse the glossy pages of Elle Decoration, and the greywash continues. Living rooms are painted in delicate doves; sofas are upholstered in thick, tweedy cloth; front doors are covered in shades of slate and battleship. At the office, we work on silver Apple Macs and view documents against grey-coloured backgrounds. The most popular underwear colour of the season, according to a feature in the current Gentlewoman magazine? Grey. The top-selling book of the decade? Fifty Shades of Grey, a book whose ubiquitous jacket resolutely sports the colour.
There is a theory, in fashion, that the most significant trends of each decade become apparent at the midway point, so 2014 is a good time to make the call. Though the current decade may not even have a name (the twenty-tens? The twenty-teens?) it has a dominant hue. This year, sales of grey T-shirts rocketed by a third on Asos, while sales of grey paint, according to Dulux, have risen by 4.1% since 2012 – a significant shift in terms of the market size. No longer shorthand for drab and depressing, grey has become a fashion colour, signifying good taste.
It has been championed by labels that celebrate off-duty chic. It is central to the sportswear-influenced designs of Alexander Wang, seen on catwalks since 2007 (he will collaborate on a collection for H&M this autumn), and the minimalist androgyny of Céline under Phoebe Philo. Grey is crucial to the louche aesthetic championed by Isabel Marant, worn by French Vogue editors and models away from the catwalk and disseminated widely in the age of style blogs and Instagram. It's the perfect colour for slinking around outside fashion shows, never giving the impression that an unfashionable amount of effort has been made. It has become the look that designers wear themselves: though Stella McCartney's autumn/winter 2014 show was a riot of emerald, navy and claret, she took her own bow in head-to-toe heather and stone.
Perhaps the most fashionable shade is heather marl, as seen on McCartney and sold, by the bucketload, at Uniqlo, where heather grey has accounted for close to 50% of sales of sweatshirts and jogging bottoms in the past year. But grey is many things to many people. For Julia Sarr-Jamois, fashion editor of Wonderland magazine, it is often dark and neutral, a counterpoint to brights and neons. For Carine Roitfeld, grey is smart and tailored; French Vogue editor Emmanuelle Alt favours light, pebbly shades. For Rihanna, light grey marl – with its connotations of late-70s sportswear – is the sartorial holy grail.
If the style set sound like they take grey seriously, try visiting a Farrow & Ball showroom, where well-heeled couples discuss colours called Cornforth White, Mouse's Back and Pigeon in whispered, reverential tones. These are seriously aspirational paints, named after shades favoured by the Bloomsbury group (Charleston Gray) or described as "reminiscent of an elegant colour used in Sweden in the late 18th century under Gustav III" (Lamp Room Gray). Farrow & Ball's influence is such that every evocative name is trademarked or registered – and every interiors expert has their preferred colour. "My favourite right now is Blackened, which is a kind of pale blue yet warm grey," says Michelle Ogundehin, editor-in-chief of Elle Decoration. Of the 132 Farrow & Ball shades, at least 20 could be classified as greys – a 10% increase, according to the company, in the past seven years. Dulux, too, reports a marked rise in the sales of grey since 2012, which creative director Marianne Shillingford attributes to the phasing-out of incandescent lightbulbs in 2011, and the rise of LEDs, which give off much brighter, cleaner light. "People are becoming braver with gutsy neutrals," she says.
Whatever the reason, many interior experts have now gone over to the smoky side. "I used to hate grey," says Ogundehin. "I deemed it a bland non-colour. I recall it being used to characterise John Major. How things change! Certainly, today, grey connotes sophistication, allure and depth. It sits well alongside other colours, holding its own but not dominating. It represents a quiet confidence." Interior designer Abigail Ahern – whose house has been featured in at least 60 interiors magazines since she painted it inky grey six years ago – believes she will never go back to white. "Anything set against grey looks more beautiful, more grand," she says. "It cocoons you and turns the room into a space you really want to hunker down into. It feels intriguing and sophisticated and glamorous."
The grey nail-varnish trend was born this decade, with Chanel's top-selling Particulière, a taupey-grey shade, and Dior's Gris Montaigne, a true mid-grey, both reaching the market early in 2010. In the past five years, too, the grey suit regained its dominant status in tailoring, after fashion outerwear flirted for much of the 1980s, 1990s and noughties with Italian-influenced black. Patrick Grant, the creative director of Savile Row tailors Norton & Sons and E Tautz, says of the English revival: "Though Italians like black suits, on Savile Row we have always worked with navy blue and grey. Designers such as Tom Ford and Thom Browne were instrumental in the resurgence of that aesthetic. Grey is a much richer, more interesting and more textural colour in suiting than black. Gucci was quite black but Tom Ford [Ford's own label, launched in 2006] is definitely grey."
"Grey is a fascinating colour," says Tony Glenville, creative director of the school of media and communication at London College of Fashion. "Until the 20th century it was not a fashion colour, or a court colour, at all." In the early 20th century, he says, "the French expression grisette referred to working girls, women who wore drab grey, perhaps because they were meant to be invisible and blend into the background". Grey was also associated with half-mourning, according to Oriole Cullen, acting senior curator of contemporary fashion at the V&A. "If a close family member died, you wore black. But if a member of the royal family died, for example, you were expected to wear grey."
Grey has had its moments in the spotlight since. After the second world war, Christian Dior famously proclaimed his adoration for the colour, painting the walls of his boutiques pearly grey and sending various "vaporous", "strong", "moth-like" and "uranium"-inspired hues down the runway. In menswear, grey became an symbol of postwar conformity – as in the 1956 Gregory Peck film The Man in the Grey Flannel Suit and on Cary Grant's advertising executive in North by Northwest. "Postwar, everyone was ready for anything new," says Glenville. "Things had been tough for a long time. The sudden appearance of a colour that had not been used much was appealing."
Grey, offset against the gaudiness of the 80s, was crucial to grunge and the minimalism of the 90s, as conceived by designers including Helmut Lang, Calvin Klein and Max Mara. Then, as now, says Glenville, "the interiors followed the trend – in the 1990s there was a lot of chrome, silver and black in homes". Dennis Nothdruft, curator of the Fashion and Textile Museum, says: "In the 90s, the most popular colour for artists and their studios was grey."
And yet black, not grey, became the neutral tone preferred by fashion insiders, the colour most closely associated with in-the-know chic. "Black turtlenecks became a kind of a uniform for arty types," says Nothdruft. So widespread was this look, he says, that "I don't think black has recovered yet from the last time it was fashionable". Of course, the adage "grey is the new black" (often attributed to the Italian designer Gianfranco Ferré or Rei Kawakubo of Comme des Garçons) have been floating around for aeons, representing a fleeting interest, for a season or two, in something other than the dominant aesthetic. The greywash of the present decade feels like a subtle but much more significant shift.
So why has it happened? For one thing, grey is the perfect shade to showcase truly luxurious fabrics. "Céline's autumn/winter 2013 collection is a brilliant example of this," says Cullen. "It all looked so covetable." Creating clothes that cannot be replicated cheaply is crucial in the digital world, where high-street "homages" and counterfeit goods are rushed out so quickly they sometimes steal a march on designers' own wares.
Grey works perfectly on the high street, particularly when compared with inexpensive blacks and whites, which tend to fade or look grubby after a few washes. Grey is hard-wearing and practical. It suits a range of skintones and complements a range of other colours, some of which – such as navy and pastels – can look odd with black. It also has outdoorsy connotations. "Marl grey is the original colour for sportswear and has always been the No 1 colour for traditional sweats and joggers," says Jane Shepherdson, CEO of Whistles. "We find that we experiment with other colours, but always return to marl grey." It is the shade that makes other colours sing. In interiors, it is the perfect backdrop to many current trends, from cool Scandanavian styles to mid-century vintage.
It makes sense that designers of Alexander Wang's age would be drawn to grey: the 30-year-old grew up in San Francisco in an era of black-and-white Calvin Klein billboards and grey sportswear in films (it's surely no coincidence that the soundtrack to his autumn/winter 2013 show was Survivor's Eye of the Tiger, the theme tune to Rocky III). Wang has also spoken of finding inspiration in that other very grey decade, the 1940s. Both the late 40s and the 90s, says Glenville, were "palate-cleansing" eras in fashion, after the second world war and the brash 1980s respectively. The current decade could be seen as palate-cleansing too, in the wake of the noughties' economic boom and bust and its accompanying parade of X Factor contestants in brightly coloured bodycon dresses.
"From a psychological standpoint," says Leatrice Eiseman, executive director of colour analysts Pantone, "there is the idea that grey – the colour of granite, rock and stone – is very stable. In the 1990s, for example, greys were popular when the economy took a plunge in many countries – a time when many people were very practical and very sombre about what they were wearing."
It has often been said that the internet age is a time beyond mass trends and big pop-cultural movements. "In the 1950s," says Glenville, "if Vogue decreed that a colour was in, all the stores in England would buy it. Fashion doesn't work that way any more." Instead, in the digital era, little trends flare up, and each of us cherry-pick the things we like, but very little sticks and appeals to the masses. It is fitting, then, that the colour that has boomed this decade – which has proved appealing to so many people in so many ways – is a messy, muddy melting-pot of a colour; a colour that goes with anything, is available in multiple shades and helps bring other, more adventurous colours to life. Though it looks chic and cool, it is functional and flattering. Grey is only really fashionable in the most subtle, democratic and versatile of ways.
1900s: Lilac; soft, feminine, misty colours such as wisteria, blush pink and eau de nil
10s: Brilliant green, ­elephant's breath and Ballet Russes colours: coral, emerald, fuschia
20s: Taupe, black, ­silver, beige, oatmeal and soft sage green and metallics
30s: Pale blush pink, silver, pale ­lemon, pale blue, pale pink
40s: Light navy blue; sharp, dark brown; navy, military and ­businesslike colours
50s: Grey, deep violet, dark green; chic ­postwar shades, but not brights
60s: Black and white, op art
70s: Bright yellow, maroon; hippie Woodstock shades
80s: Dynasty electric blue, reds, greens and grey. Plus Comme des Garçons and Yohji Yamamoto black 
90s: Black, with lots of grey
2000s: Colour gets confused – anything goes!
Shares in French Connection soared more than 11% on Monday as the fashion chain revealed a jump in sales in the first quarter of the year.
The stock rose 7.25p to 74.25p after the company said sales in stores open more than a year had risen by 11% in the 11 weeks to April 12 as shoppers took a shine to its new spring ranges. But French Connection, which has been struggling to turn around poor trading figures for years, admitted that its recent performance was flattered by comparison against a weak corresponding period a year earlier. In the six months to the end of July 2013 underlying sales sank 4.5%.
Last year chairman and founder Stephen Marks said moves to make French Connection's clothing more attractive and affordable under a new management team were paying off.
However, analysts do not expect the chain, which made a loss of £4.4m in the year to January, to move into the black until 2016.
Would you rather look on-trend, or would you rather look like Kate Moss? Rhetorical question, obviously. Mossy is the unrivalled British style icon of the past two decades. Her position at the top of every best-dressed poll is unshakeable, despite – indeed, come to think of it, partly because of – the fact that she more often wears old favourites than straight-off-the-catwalk trophy fashion, and is more likely to be snapped in yesterday's blow-dry, fag in hand, head thrown back in laughter, than in polished-to-perfection celebrity-doll mode.
Seven years after the first Kate Moss for Topshop collection, and three years after the collaboration was put on ice, Moss for Topshop is back. Except this time it is different. Where the early collections were a Moss-influenced take on that season's trends, the new range is Kate on Kate: a wardrobe autobiography, in fringed leather and sequinned stars. Seasonal trends are mostly ignored and, instead, the references are to Moss's own wardrobe and personal style heroines. The silver-fringed jacket that she wears on the cover of the latest issue of Vogue is a recreation of a near-identical piece that she loved and lost. A white Aztec-embroidered linen kaftan is a reproduction of a vintage version that Moss still wears every summer.
Katy England, her longstanding collaborator, has worked with Moss and a four-strong Topshop team to help turn vintage pieces, magazine tear sheets and sketched ideas into a collection. More than a stylist, England is fashion's go-to ghostwriter, with a talent for ordering and untangling a designer's messy creative vision into a coherent collection. She is the Andrew O'Hagan to Kate Moss's Julian Assange, if you like, although with a happier outcome.
Moodboards created by Moss and England for the studio are dominated by photos of the model off-duty: Kate entering Claridge's for her "Beautiful and Damned"-themed 30th birthday party, Kate in hotpants, Kate dressed for a date with Johnny Depp. Strikingly, there are very few photos of Kate's modelling photos on the boards. This collection is all about Kate as Kate. It's a reflection of how Moss's sense of her value as a fashion brand outside her work as a model has grown. On the moodboards, images of her are interspersed with a 30s Garbo in satin and fur, a late-60s Marianne Faithfull, full-fringed and smiling in the sunshine; a 70s holiday snap of Jane Birkin and her daughter; and Michelle Pfeiffer as the ice-queen gangster moll Elvira Hancock in 1983's Scarface. All compelling beauties who chose not to conform to conventional, domesticated female norms, women with dangerous tastes in lovers and expensive tastes in clothes.
Which part of this collection appeals to you will depend on which Kate Moss era you find most compelling. My favourite piece is a black cocktail dress in raw Indian silk dupion with a textured, Shantung-silk effect and a feathered neckline that exposes the shoulders. In an email explaining the collection, Moss says it is "based on a vintage dress of mine that has incredible seaming that makes you look so sexy. This is definitely a date-night dress with a high-strappy shoe. Perfect for drinks in Le Fumoir bar at Claridge's." And that, of course, is the Moss magic right there: not just the dress itself (although the construction is impressive, with a full lining and a bottom-flattering inverted back pleat) but the night out that it promises. Not surprisingly for one of the great hellraisers of her generation, Moss has nailed the party-dress element of this range. A black maxi dress is sliced into ribbons from hip level down to the hem, so that the shimmer lining of the satin-backed crepe catches the light as you move. And at 40, Moss sees the appeal of a non teeny-tiny cocktail option: a silk evening pyjama set, with a cropped button-through top and a high-waisted, wide-legged trouser, has both glamour and an appealing loucheness. ("I'll be wearing this with a high shoe for evening, and then at the weekend in the country at home for lounging around," says Moss.)
The Kate Moss look does not come cheap, however, even at Topshop. The range has been, in retail speak, "up-specced" since the previous collections. Moss wanted to "make sure every piece is really special" and the basics, such as cotton vests, which were part of the initial offering, have been jettisoned, and fabrics have been upgraded across the board. Embellished fabrics are two-a-penny on the high street these days, but for the most part, they look it. Here, the embellishment is densely clustered for a richness that gives a very different feel from the sparse, night-market look of the cheap stuff. The "Aztec" kaftan sells for £75, which is a good price for hand-embroidery on heavy Indian linen, but still a lot for the average Topshop customer to spend on a beach throw-on. An asymmetric yellow silk cocktail dress that Moss famously wore to a New York fashion week dinner in 2003, that was "homaged" in the 2007 Topshop range in a cheap cotton version, is here given a lavish reissue – this time using five metres of chiffon for each dress, with an ensuing price tag of £85. (Topshop is making the dress mostly in lemon yellow, with just a few in emerald and black. Only Moss can make yellow the new black.) While most pieces are being made in runs of many thousands and will be available in 38 countries – the £50 studded denim hotpants and £65 paisley sundress, for example – some are much more exclusive. An Elvira Hancock-esque scalloped blue satin maxi, for example, of which only 20 are being made, will sell for £295. The most expensive dress in the collection will be exclusive on Net-A-Porter for £600, with 50 available.
Is there such a thing, in fashion, as too much Moss? Possibly. Uncle Phil has perhaps overindulged Moss's weakness for 70s bohemia, a look that is charming in small doses but which, when overdone, can get a bit witchy. Sheer blouses with chiffon sleeves have a Rumours-era-Stevie-Nicks vibe which looks stupid at the bus stop. Too many handkerchief hems, too many magician's-assistant star motifs, and too much fringing for my taste. A navy leather jacket has beautifully moulded narrow shoulders but is then shredded from the ribs to hips – a faithful reproduction of what Moss calls her "gig jacket". But the key test of a celebrity-designed fashion collection is whether it feels like the handwriting is genuine, whether the designs capture the essence of the name they sell. And on that, this collection passes with flying colours.
• Kate Moss's new Topshop collection is released on 30 April
Heavy discounting on clothing, shoes and electrical goods by duelling retailers helped trigger the fastest fall in prices in Britain's shops in more than seven years last month.
Shop prices overall were 1.7% lower in March than a year earlier, driven down by falls in most non-food categories, but most notably a 12.8% drop in the cost of clothing and footwear and a 4.4% fall in the price of electrical goods. Food inflation also slowed significantly, to 0.8%.
It was the fastest shop-price deflation since the British Retail Consortium/Nielsen index began in December 2006.
Helen Dickinson, the BRC's director-general, said the deflation rate reflected retailers' efforts to attract customers who were carefully managing their budgets. "It's strong industry-wide competition as retailers vie for a share of limited spending capacity that is driving this record-breaking run. Retailers have been responding to their customers with keen prices and promotions to maintain market share," she said.
Prices have fallen in all categories of clothing and footwear for seven successive months, with children's clothing and women's clothing the fastest fallers in March.
Non-food deflation of 3.2% was the sharpest on record, while last month's food inflation number was also an all-time low for the series.
Dickinson said that as 15% of disposable incomes were spent on food and drink among the poorest third of UK households, slowing food inflation reflected "retail's significant contribution to maintaining standards of living".
The consumer price index – Britain's official measure of inflation – has outpaced average wage growth for much of the past five years, dragging standards of living lower. However, inflation has fallen in recent months and is now below the Bank of England's 2% target. It is widely predicted that wages will finally start to outpace inflation later this year, offering some relief to consumers and budgets.
Fresh food prices were the biggest driver of falling food inflation in March, with prices rising by just 0.6% in March compared with 1.5% in February on an annual basis. Lower prices of fish and vegetables and slowing inflation on milk, cheese, eggs and meat were behind the dip in fresh food inflation.
BRC/Nielsen said that there had been some upward pressure on commodity prices since the beginning of the year due to poor harvests in Brazil, the world's top producer of coffee, sugar and orange juice. Meanwhile, a slowdown of cocoa production in West Africa has been attributed to below average rainfall, sending prices up.
The report added: "The prices of corn, wheat and cotton were up in double digits over the last three months. However, such sharp rises remain isolated and, although recent price movements need to be monitored carefully, the global outlook for rising commodity prices remains modest."
Dickinson said support from the government on other costs facing retailers, such as business rate reform and the recent reliefs for national insurance contributions, would be important in keeping shop prices down.
The latest official data published last month showed that rain and flooding failed to dampers shoppers' enthusiasm in February, with the volume of retail sales rising by 1.7% on the previous month – more than three times as fast as economists had expected. It followed a 2% drop in January.
House of Fraser is the latest British company to fall into foreign hands after its owners struck a takeover deal with Chinese conglomerate Sanpower which values the 165-year-old department store chain at more than £450m.
Sanpower, which is controlled by one of China's richest men, Yuan Yafei, owns China's oldest department store, Nanjing Xinjiekou. The deal puts paid to plans to list House of Fraser on the London stock exchange with Sanpower inking a deal to buy a 89% stake.
House of Fraser, which traces its roots back to a small Glasgow drapery shop opened by Hugh Fraser and James Arthur in 1849, has been in play for several years but earlier talks with France's Galeries Lafayette and the Sports Direct founder, Mike Ashley, came to nothing. In recent months a listing had looked increasingly likely with the negotiations with Sanpower run as a parallel process.
The chairman, Don McCarthy, and his family spoke for 20% of voting shares in House of Fraser's holding group, with a further 49% controlled by representatives of failed Icelandic banks, largely Landsbanki. The Sanpower deal is thought to hand them a long-awaited exit.
Sir Tom Hunter and fellow retail entrepreneur Kevin Stanford were also large shareholders. In the wake of the Sanpower deal it is not clear who owns the remainder of the equity.
House of Fraser is the latest British company to fall into Chinese hands. Manganese Bronze, the maker of London's black cabs, was bought by China's Geely for £11m last year while Chinese companies also own Gieves & Hawkes, the Savile Row tailor founded in 1771, luxury yacht firm Sunseeker and breakfast favourite Weetabix.
The House of Fraser chief executive, John King, said the deal was an "opportunity to take the brand to China", according to a report on the Chinese website Sina.cn.
Sanpower controls 100 companies in sectors including banking, retail, media and property, with assets worth £4.8bn, according to its website.
Yuan, who worked as a government official in Yuhuatai District, Nanjing City, set up Sanpower in 1993. He plans to build 1,100 "lifestyle hubs", boasting shopping, leisure, dining and entertainment centres, in China's biggest towns and cities over the next decade and harbours ambitions to become a Fortune Global 500 company by 2015. House of Fraser is its first investment in the UK.
In the 1990s, Calvin Klein's adverts ruled the billboards and Christy Turlington was – quite literally – the poster girl. The American model, one of the original Peter Lindbergh-lensed Supers, was on Calvin Klein's books from 1987. She starred in ads for ready-to-wear, underwear and perfume. Her ads for Eternity – often on a beach, often with an equally photogenic man – were stripped back, natural and, most importantly, sold perfume by the bucketload.
The Christy and Calvin classic is now back – in the hope that in can do the same for 2014. Calvin Klein has reissued the 1995 advert with a 25-year-old Turlington and male model Mark Vanderloo, fresh from a dip in the ocean, sporting the most 1990s hair ever. The tagline reads: "Time can't touch us. Celebrating 25 years."
After last year, when Turlington, now 45, starred in a Calvin Klein underwear campaign, this revisiting of her previous outing is a clever move – one that encourages nostalgia from a generation that remembers the first time, and introduces a brand's heritage to a younger one.
The 1990s revival has clearly been noticed by the marketing execs at Calvin Klein. A recent social media campaign saw the brand send its classic underwear, with name in the waistband, to the likes of The Man Repeller's Leandra Medrine and model Miranda Kerr. They promptly posted scantily clad selfies of themselves wearing the underwear, with the hashtag #mycalvins – name-checking both the classic Brooke Shields 1981 ad, and Kate Moss and Mark Wahlberg in their undies, which followed just over a decade later.
This strategy has drifted into ready-to-wear too. The sweatshirts in the men's autumn/winter collection bearing the Obsession and Eternity logos were a stroke of genius, and a way to give this brand – maybe not on the radar of younger customers – a hip spin. Turlington's classic ad back on our billboards only adds to the message: the 1990s are back and Calvin reigns supreme once again.
Illegally traded python skins worth $1bn (£600m) are being imported into Europe every year as weak regulation fails to stop illicit traders capitalising on demand for the dramatically patterned leather.
Half a million skins are imported legally each year from south-east Asia, most of them destined for Italy, Germany and France, where they are made into designer handbags, shoes and belts.
Legal imports have grown from 350,000 skins valued at just €100m (£82.6m) in 2005 to $1bn today as Beyoncé, Johnny Depp's partner, Amber Heard, Khloé Kardashian and Tamara Ecclestone have jumped on the trend for the exotic handbags, which can sell for more than £4,000 each. But the black market in skins is thought to be worth about the same amount again, amid widespread circumventing of international agreements to limit the number of pythons taken from the wild. In its first report on how to improve the international trade and protect pythons, the Python Conservation Partnership, backed by the owner of Gucci – Kering – and the International Union for Conservation of Nature, said python farms could be part of the answer.
"This report offers [an] alternative solution to the sourcing of python skins for which demand is escalating. However, there is still some way to go towards more transparent, better-managed python farming," said Jean-Christophe Vié, deputy director of the International Union for Conservation of Nature's global species programme. "We must make sure that attention is not diverted from the urgent need to preserve wild pythons and their habitats through direct site conservation and action against illegal trade."
In the past, farming of south-east Asia's reticulated python (Python reticulatus) and Burmese python (Python molurus bivittatus) – two of the world's largest snakes – had been dismissed as uneconomic because pythons were thought to take too long to mature and to be too difficult to feed and breed in captivity.
The report said commercial farms do exist in China, Vietnam and Thailand. It recommends this industry could be improved with the introduction of better monitoring, more humane slaughter techniques and the urgent development of technology such as DNA or isotope testing to help identify whether a skin is farmed or taken from the wild. Such tests could help prevent the "laundering" of illegally caught wild pythons through farms. That practice is thought to be so widespread that the report says that all supposedly farmed python skin from Laos, Cambodia, Indonesia and Malaysia should be treated with caution as there is little proof that farms exist in these countries.
Marie-Claire Daveu, chief sustainability officer at Kering, said that demand for python skin accessories was rising at Gucci, especially from Asia, and so it was keen to ensure a sustainable source of supply. "Our objective is to be sure that we don't put in danger these two species of python and their eco-system," she said.
The company currently buys farmed and wild-caught skins certified under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) scheme from Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam.
Daveu said that there needed to be a balance between ethically farmed pythons and the trade in wild python skins, which provided jobs for local communities that could support the protection of the reptiles in their own habitat. But she admitted: "Today there is no way to be fully sure where the skin has come from."
• This article was amended on 1 April to reinstate the value of the legal trade in python skins
This week the British fashion industry finally shed its image of cautious provincialism laced with endearing eccentricity and earned the applause of those members of the international fashion community in London for the show of the top ready-to-wear designers and the major fashion exhibitions at Olympia and the Kensington Exhibition Centre.
British design, always fertile and original, has been growing in importance for several seasons in spite of the muddled efforts of its promoters and salesmen. Over the last few years observers of the scene have shared moments of despair as we contemplated the chaos from clashing egos and conflicting interest groups as vanity, snobbery and parochialism won out over sense and imagination.
But sense and imagination fought back. This week they triumphed. The shows were well planned and well organised. The top designers had stands at Olympia rather than scattered through several stuffy West End hotels, making life easier for buyers and press alike - and for window-shopping fashion fans like the Princess of Wales.
But more than that, a design conscious Government lent both substance and glamour to Fashion Week. Norman Lamont, Minister of State for Industry, gave a good deal of time to attending shows and cocktail parties. The Prime Minister hosted a reception at 10 Downing Street which had the presidents of several American store groups cancelling appointments in other countries to fly to London to be gently lectured on the merits of British fashion under the portraits of George III and Lord Nelson.
Katharine Hamnett, probably this country's most copied designer, launched Fashion Week with a specially written song called Acid Rain Rap and voluminous T-shirts demanding a World-wide Nuclear Ban Now. For the foreigners, coming straight from the establishment-cosy, luxurious Milan shows, it must have been both a shock and a revelation. With the T-shirts, Hamnett showed padded white silk decontamination suits, generously cut, beautifully detailed parkas and trench coats, cropped jackets in heavy cotton, skirts that were straight and short or long, narrow and flared from round about knee level, unisex baggy slept-in trouser suits in dark denim.
Ted Baker hailed its transformation into a "global lifestyle brand" as the eccentric fashion label revealed strong sales growth in North America, Asia and Europe.
Ray Kelvin, founder and chief executive of the group, said the brand had performed well online and in stores around the world. "We've been designing the right product. It's a very simple formula."
The brand, which has 362 stores and concessions as far afield as China, Japan and Canada, said sales rose more than a quarter to £322m while pre-tax profits rose 35% to £39m.
Growth was particularly strong in the US and Canada, up 38%, as the company said its brand had gained recognition by opening an outlet on New York's Fifth Avenue. Sales continued to power ahead in Britain where the group opened a new store at Gatwick airport and rebuilt its website, helping drive a 51% rise in online sales across Europe.
Kelvin, who launched the label as a shirt store in Glasgow, said the new online platform would help Ted Baker open internet stores around the world with plans to launch in Australia this year. "Its efficient, quick and easy to use," he said.
He said the pace of high street store openings would slow as Ted Baker got existing outlets "motoring".
"It's just getting good," he said. "We started the year very well. [The economy] has been tough but I think its getting better and we are cautiously confident."
Alexandra Shulman, the editor of British Vogue, is bored with being asked why models are so thin. She said this on Radio 2 to Lily Allen, who acted like a frightened child but nonetheless asked Shulman tough questions that fashion journalists won't ask. Fashion journalists are notoriously prostrate beneath the clothes; their shtick is to act like Vladimir Putin's acolytes trapped in Topshop, screaming about belts, and if you break out and speak the truth, you become Liz Jones, an outcast in your own genre.
Allen said images of thin models made her feel "crap". Well, they don't make me feel crap, answered Shulman (I paraphrase) – so who cares what you think? Anyway, Shulman is bored with this thin-themed twaddle; such a fashion word, "bored", so passive aggressive, so unanswerable. You may be right but you're dull; this is no-platforming in the style of Mean Girls. In fact Shulman can't even really stretch to being "bored", despite being paid what I presume is a large salary for a slender workload; she is, in fact, only "sort of" bored, because this phrasing better expresses the exact proportions of her ennui, which I can only presume is definitely overweight.
She told Allen that looking at overweight women didn't make her feel good, as if overweight is the only alternative, in her mind, to significantly malnourished. Shulman has written to designers asking for larger sample sizes. (I read that in another piece of iconography posing as an interview.) But that was it. She is, at the end of things, only an advocate for the clothes. She calls herself a journalist; but she is a saleswoman.
The answer to the original question of why models are so thin – and do prepare to be bored, because I cannot give you a new answer because the old answer is boring (as is the old question, of course): it is the incitement of misogyny in pursuit of profit.
What fashion considers to be the ideal is barely a woman. This is so obviously the case there is almost nothing else to say. In this dystopia Shulman can, in her defence, tell Lily Allen that the Vogue cover girl for April, Nigella Lawson, is a "totally real person" – as opposed to what? Lawson is a woman of extraordinary beauty, but to Shulman, obviously deadened by an unceasing parade of tiny, malleable teenagers (she says "clothes to our kind of western eye look better on a thinner frame"), Nigella is simply "real".
But fashion's fantasy woman – her default fault, if you will – is a mere scrape of a woman, a woman who has had no time to actually be a woman: too young, too small, a vulnerable thing I often imagine crawling from an egg in Karl Lagerfeld's fridge. (And he is a man so pathologically isolated, his stated muse is now a cat called Choupette with a Twitter feed. Sample tweet: "Anna Wintour sits SECOND ROW at @MaisonValentino? Tres Horror!") It is as if fashion closed its eyes and dreamed up the woman who most closely resembles dust.
Why? Some say it is because designers are all gay, and are afraid of big bottoms and so forth, but this is nonsense, and homophobic; fashion is full of straight women capable of revolution, if they weren't all hostages in Topshop and so very bored.
Shulman says that fashion sells a fantasy, a wonderland, and this may be true for the few thousand women who can afford to wear couture; but it is a wonderland where happiness is as fleeting as any narcotic (six collections a year?). And it is, above all, monetised.
If fashion is your primary means of expression, you are, for me, only to be pitied – because women have better means of expression nowadays. Is it a coincidence that the fashion houses' most avid customers are the female relatives of the tyrants of the Middle East? Fashion is obsessed with surfaces; and it is full of victims.
I would not say that all fashion people are unhappy, but it does seem to attract the unhappy, the soon to be surgically enhanced. And so this child creature, this ideal, is no coincidence. She is a complex sales strategy; both fragile and remote. Because she cannot be impersonated, she sells self-loathing, as Lily Allen noted, and therefore clothing, perfumes and the rest. It is not the wonderland that Shulman espoused, but it is an escape from something that can never be successfully eluded for any length of time – yourself.
If fashion is truly, as apologists suggest, dedicated to female self-expression, then why have trends? Why have a homogeneous law of beauty that cannot be bent? Why have subservient media that behave, so shamefully, like a marketing subsidiary? Why call it "fashion" at all?
In fact, the fashion industry is the most perfect expression of the late capitalist business model. It pretends to sell free choice, but is conventional. It is conservative, racist, misogynist, a terrible polluter, and a fearsome hierarchy. It is covetous, exploitative of models, workers and customers, and it is often tasteless: Vogue Italia's 2006 State of Emergency, for instance, photographed models being sexually assaulted by a tableau of men dressed like Batman, to celebrate – or commemorate – 9/11.
And all this it does, as Alexandra Shulman has demonstrated, with a tiny yawn – a cat's yawn, perhaps? – and entirely without shame.
Inditex, the owner of Zara, has revealed its first fall in annual profits in five years as the world's biggest fashion retailer invested in stores while foreign exchange rates moved against it.
Pre-tax profits for the year to 15 March slipped 2.5% to €3.05bn despite a 4.9% rise in sales to €16.72bn as consumer spending bounced back in southern European markets.
However, shares in the Spanish retail group rose 4.8% to €108 after the company revealed a step up in underlying sales growth to about 4% in the final quarter of the year to 15 March, according to analysts. That compared to about 3% in the previous three months.
The company said sales in Spain, which account for a fifth of the group total, rose 3% in the second half of last year and the chief executive, Pablo Isla, said he expected the positive trend to continue in 2014 after several years of difficulties in the company's home market.
"We are seeing recovery in southern Europe and Inditex is quite highly exposed to southern Europe. Spain, Portugal, Greece and Italy – all those countries are bouncing back," said Anne Critchlow, retail analyst with Société Générale.
Inditex, which owns the Pull & Bear, Massimo Dutti, Bershka, Stradivarius, Oysho, Lefties and Urterque brands as well as Zara, also revealed plans to increase investment in refurbishments and new stores from €1.2bn last year to €1.35bn, allowing it add up to 500 new stores this year compared to 330 in 2013.
"We have big expectations for Zara in 2014," Isla told analysts, adding that the store revamp programme had been largely completed and pointing to flagship openings in Madrid, Hong Kong, Miami and Zurich.
The company also said it had started online sales in Greece in March and would launch in Romania in April, followed by South Korea and Mexico later in the year, taking the total number of e-commerce markets to 27, compared with a planned 13 for H&M. "Online came very, very naturally to us... we believe the growth opportunity is huge," Isla said.
The Peshawari chappal is a leather sandal worn in parts of Pakistan. Paul Smith found it, trimmed the sole with neon pink and named it "Robert". The Robert costs £300; chappals cost £15 or less. No wonder Pakistan's Dawn newspaper this week reported on a petition against this restyling of a classic. Paul Smith now says the shoe is "inspired by the Peshawari chappal" – and no longer calls it Robert.
"Inspired by" is a great catch-all for fashion, a trope that suggests reappropriation is as natural as breathing. There is some truth in that. It would be a hard job to unpick the cultural heritage of your own daily wardrobe. The genealogy of even a pair of jeans is contested, reaching back through those worn by manual workers in California courtesy of Levi Strauss & Co, to trousers worn by sailors in Genoa, and earlier depictions of workwear in Italian paintings; the fabric itself may have been made in Nimes.
Footwear seems to be particularly susceptible to restyling and reselling: consider moccasins, Chinese slippers, cowboy boots, espadrilles, Uggs, Ferragamo's famous "kimo" shoe (a take on the Japanese tabi), Swedish Hasbeens, Capri thongs and even Birkenstocks. Every category of clothing can be repurposed and upcycled, from rosaries and "slave" bangles (a Diana Vreeland find) through so-called "Gypsy" earrings, ponchos, laundry bags and fishermen's tunics. Perhaps what matters is not so much the taking as the crediting – or lack of it.
Here are five examples of western fashion mavens freely helping themselves to inspiration.
The chequered Palestinian headscarf became a hit western trend in 2007 after an embroidered version featured on the Balenciaga catwalk and subsequently went on sale for a little under £3,000. Urban Outfitters initially marketed it as "an antiwar woven scarf". Topshop went for the less complicatedly offensive "tablecloth scarf". All the while the only Palestinian keffiyeh factory was going bust.
It is easy to forget that kaftans have a clothing function in addition to offering a glamorous cover-up to throw over a bikini. Net-a-porter sells 95 styles. Roberto Cavalli's costs over £3,000. It is the hot-weather equivalent of the pashmina.
Fashion loves to call a print "tribal". The infamous "Navajo hipster panty", one of a range of products sold by Urban Outfitters in 2011 as Navajo, caused outrage. The Navajo nation subsequently sued the Philadelphia-based clothing store for violations of the Indian Arts And Crafts Act.
Western designers love beadwork by the Maasai people of Tanzania and Kenya. Ralph Lauren had a summer Masai collection in 1997 featuring beaded dresses and jewellery. The same year Alexander McQueen used Masai beadwork. And John Galliano's "Masai" collars for Dior still sell for over £1,000 in the vintage market.
In autumn 2006 Marc Jacobs sent models down the Louis Vuitton catwalk with checked laundry bags, stamped with the Louis Vuitton logo. The bag cost around £1,200 – a fashion joke about the power logos exert over good sense.
I've written a lot recently, both here and on my blog Grey Fox, about the slow but steady resurgence of the British fashion manufacturing industry. This rise has coincided with news of disasters, exploitation and abuse of workers in clothing factories in Asia. Events such as the building collapse at Rana Plaza in Bangladesh in 2013 have prompted many to consider ethics and sustainability when buying products, favouring those made in the UK or countries where standards of worker safety and fair pay are effectively protected.
But there are those who produce products in Asia who are genuinely concerned about ethics and sustainability, about worker welfare and environmental issues. To consider this side of the issue I contacted Clare Lissaman, the co-founder and director of Arthur & Henry, a business selling shirts and cotton scarves which have been ethically-made in India. "A couple of years ago we sat in a pub garden and tried to write down what an 'ethical fashion business' would entail," she says. "It got complicated, backs of envelopes were used and everything."
They found that there were many questions that would need to be considered. Lissaman continues: "Was local production ethically superior to distant production? The carbon footprint of local [production] is lower, isn't it? Well, where do all the materials come from in the first place? Is it better to create a job in Wales or Bangalore? What about the ethics of producing 'fast fashion' – isn't it fundamentally wrong to produce a T-shirt that is only going to be worn once before being thrown away, but what if the production of said T-shirt gives somebody a job so that they can feed their children? The point here is that all too often today the job making that cheap T-shirt does not enable them to keep themselves, let alone their children."
After much discussion, Lissaman and her colleagues came to the following tentative conclusions:
1) "Fast fashion" is fundamentally wrong. Even regardless of labour standards and environmental concerns, throwing something away before it has reached the end of its useful life is a waste of the earth's resource and human endeavour. We all do it to a certain extent, but that doesn't make it right.
2) Fast fashion is practically wrong. The demands of the industry that requires low costs and rapid turn-around times generate an industry that pays people very badly, gives them near zero job security, is damaging to the environment and leads to disasters such as the Rana Plaza building collapse in Bangladesh which killed 1,100 people, mainly garment workers.
So they decided that they, "would build a business based around 'slow fashion' and the spirit of Coco Chanel – 'Fashion, you see, goes out of fashion. Style never.' That business was Arthur & Henry. Nothing would make us happier than somebody wearing one of our shirts to the office until the cuffs start to fray, then rolling the sleeves up at the weekends, then migrating it into a gardening shirt, then finally turning it into rags. Every ounce of usefulness has been extracted from all the effort put into its production, from farmer to tailor, from miller to shop assistant."
They also decided that, when running the business, they would treat people decently. Not just the farmers who grow the cotton, or the mill workers who turn it into fabric, but everybody else who works in the business and all of their customers as well.
"Our goal isn't monochrome," says Lissaman. "Yes, success to us means making money – that, after all, is a degree of proof that what we are doing is working and sustainable – but success also comes in other forms; the money we raise for charity (1% of turnover); minimising any damage we do to the environment (our cotton is organic, our garments now GOTS certified for the whole of their production); maximising benefit to workers.
"We treat our suppliers well, paying a decent price so they can pay decent wages. We talk with our tailors and cutters and finishers. We treat them as the skilled human beings they are, not just numbers behind a sewing machine. We produce in India because it's close to the cotton growing, the fabric weaving, but also because around a quarter of Indians live below the poverty line. They need decent work. If others copy us and join the market for ethical menswear, that, too, we shall treat as a success".
Among Arthur & Henry's products are scarves made from 100% fine lambswool, spun and woven by the women of the Panchachuli co-operative in the Himalayas. The women of the area can suffer sexual abuse and domestic violence and the co-operative supports them economically, giving them a degree of much-needed independence. All profits are ploughed back into the organisation with the objective of increasing opportunities for rural women to receive training, gain employment and earn a livelihood for themselves and their families through the hand loom way of life.
Despite her strongly held views, Lissaman doesn't like to preach. "We are in the shirt business, not the tell-people-how-to-live-their-lives business, so we don't crow on about the ethics, let's just make some fantastic clothes and accessories. Nobody likes to be preached at by a sanctimonious do-gooder but everybody deserves a decent life".
• This article was amended on 11 March 2014. The original article described Rana Plaza as having caught fire, when in fact the building collapsed. This has been corrected.
Tommy Marr lives with his mum in Ealing, west London, shops in Topman and follows Tottenham Hotspur. He tweets about everything from his toenail falling off to "giving it large in Croatia" and posts pictures of his coffee cup decorated with a smiley face because the "Starbucks lady 100% fancied me". So far, so your average 18-year-old boy in 2014.
That coffee comment might not have been just adolescent bravado. Marr is likely to turn heads, even of the most harried barista: he's 1.9m (6ft 2in) tall, blond with green eyes, a cheeky grin, a baby face with added cheekbones. He's also a male model. On the books of Next, one of London's biggest agencies (they also look after supers including Arizona Muse and Malgosia Bela), today he's on his way around London for appointments with Longchamp, Burberry and Margaret Howell.
These are castings – open model auditions – for shows at London Collections: Men, the menswear fashion week that takes place in January. He is on his way from his agency's office on Old Street to a casting for a Longchamp presentation around the corner. Once inside, the world of the male model starts to take shape. Five or six other boys, all accompanied by the telltale "book" – a black A4 portfolio with photos of previous work inside – and regulation cheekbones, sit on benches in a reception area, staring straight ahead in silence. This is not an industry where friends are easily made. Marr, who also plays football semi-professionally, says "it's almost as competitive. I have a couple of model friends but not loads. You don't tend to go around together".
When Marr's name is called, another aspect of his day-to-day reveals itself – quite literally. Marr strips off to be photographed in one of the brand's suits. He's wearing pants with the Superman logo on the waistband. He's still just a boy. He may have started his career with an exclusive on the Calvin Klein catwalk in Milan, but he's inexperienced. "I have done shoots when I have to pretend it's summer, standing in my pants, been in a bath and asked to blow bubbles," he says, with a smile at the mysteries of the industry.
Following Marr – chosen at random from a selection of new faces – is a study in one of fashion's least high-profile industries. Every move of the zeitgeist's current favourite model Cara Delevingne is followed in its minutiae, but her male counterparts are left well alone. Ask a passerby to name a male model and they would probably say Derek Zoolander, the antihero of Ben Stiller's hilarious 2001 spoof of the industry. While the 80s produced a couple of models that edged towards household name – Tyrese, Marcus Schenkenberg – the trend hasn't continued.
The idea of a stable of male supermodels equivalent to Naomi, Kate, Claudia and Christy seems remote, sure, but men's fashion is on the up. Estimated to be worth £10.4bn in 2013, it's grown 12% in the past five years, and a study by Mintel suggests this will continue, with growth to 2017 predicted at 11%. In line with this change, the interest in male models is also growing. Forbes magazine now publishes a list of the highest-paid male models alongside its one for women, and there are a couple of names on there – David Gandy, Sean O'Pry – that might just resonate outside of the industry. The March cover of US men's magazine Details features 10 of the biggest names working in men's fashion today.
Male models are still small fry compared with the female of the species, though. The combined total earnings of the top 10 male models – £4.85m – is dwarfed by their female counterparts, who earned more than £50m. Sarah Vickery, Marr's agent at Next, is quite upfront about it. "It's the only industry, apart from prostitution, where men get paid less," she says.
Vickery – who has the unenviable task of organising the lives and careers of a bunch of teenage boys – is sanguine. "The day rate for a catalogue model is around £3,500 for a guy, but it's £8,000 for a girl," she says. "There's not really much you can do about that."
Patrick McKenzie, who began modelling in the noughties was paid $500 (£307) for appearing in a Gucci campaign, while the girls "were probably on $10,000. I didn't care – I thought it was a fortune". Fifteen years later, Marr is resigned to the difference, too. "Unless you're David Gandy, you don't earn as much money as the girls," he says, sat on the 55 bus from Old Street as it lurches around another corner on its way to Hackney Central. "I guess it kind of makes sense – there's a lot more focus on girls' fashion."
Indeed. Menswear's £10.4bn worth has nothing on the women's industry, which was estimated at about £20.7bn in 2012. This massive disparity could be down to the fact that, for an average Joe who likes fashion, an interest in models is not an extension of being interested in clothes. According to Kevin Braddock, editor-in-chief of style magazine Sleek (which published a special on masculinity earlier this year), "Any heterosexual guy found staring at another guy is going to have an elbow in the ribs from his friends."
While society sees a direct link between female models and how young girls feel about their looks, Braddock believes their male counterparts have less impact on their sex's self-esteem.
"I think most men would dismiss a male model as 'just a model'," he says, "blank and cold-looking. Men are less interested in what other men look like," adding that's why sportsmen often star in ad campaigns: "They care about someone like Theo Walcott because he's part of their wider belief system or allegiances."
If neither supermodel fame nor house-buying riches are on the cards for most male models, why do they do it? Unlike women in the industry, many seem to have second jobs. Marr has a Saturday job in Hollister – proving staff at the store really do have model looks – and others I talk to work as a graphic designer, photographic studio manager and a DJ. This is often a necessity, rather than a sideline. The website payscale.com reported last year that a moderately successful female model would be on £29,000, while a male model would be on £16,000. Doing the maths, Linda Evangelista – who famously said she wouldn't get out of bed for less than $10,000 – wouldn't even roll over for £16,000 a year.
Still, the appeal seems to be – for teenagers like Marr at least – earning enough from doing relatively little. "Before modelling, I was scavenging off my mum," he says. "I genuinely don't know what I would have done if this hadn't happened. I might have worked with my dad in the garage."
"A successful guy is never going to reach the heights of Gisele [Bündchen, the world's highest-paid model, who earned more than £25m last year]," says Ryan Frost, a men's booker at London agency, Models 1, "but if you're an 18-year-old kid, the money isn't bad."
Marr models only part-time, but he's giving it a good go. Now at the casting for Common – a Swedish brand making its debut at LC:M – in an industrial estate in Hackney Wick, he's struggling to get his footballer's thighs into regulation skinny trousers. Not that he lets that trouble him much – for a young model, it is all about casting your net wide. Rejection from one designer might mean open arms from another. He has high hopes for Burberry and Tom Ford, both of whom tend to use more athletic body types. "You have to be quite resilient," he says, on the walk to the train station, checking his phone for his next appointment. Marr's look – healthy, fresh-faced and with good bone structure – works in his favour. Adam Hindle, a casting director who works across Tom Ford to Damir Doma, says the aesthetic changes depending on the client but "it has been more grownup over the last few seasons".
"People want healthy at the moment," Vickery adds, "kind of like Bruce Weber but less bulky." Marr, with a bit of fake tan, would fit right in.
Even with all this on his side, Marr should be prepared for a shockingly short career. Frost says out of 10 boys that Models 1 might initially sign, only three or four move from new faces to the main board – where established models are grouped – and therefore stand the test of time. Even then, an editorial model – a boy who has an indie rather than boyband look – could be modelling for only four years.
As with the women, male models are often young and naive when they start to work in a grownup industry. This can spell classic "too much too young" trouble. Patrick McKenzie, the Gucci model, started working in 1999 after he was spotted by a casting agent. He started at the top. The California native's first job was in front of Mario Testino's lens, paired with supermodel Jacquetta Wheeler. For a 19-year-old boy, it felt great. "Guys are happy to be an object of desire," he says.
But he quit after five years because he felt overwhelmed by it. "You're in your formative years, legitimately an adult but really you're just out of high school. And living like that, it really does a number on you because there's no accountability other than turning up on time."
Now 33, he's since rejoined the industry, but works as a film-maker. He's art-directed videos for big names such as Taylor Swift, and he is currently working on a documentary about the alienation of the male model experience. It was partly prompted by the suicide of several friends, including Josh Sangster, a Canadian model who died after a work trip to Tokyo. McKenzie is keen to stress that modelling wasn't to blame for the tragedies, but says that it's an easy industry for young men to disappear without a trace. "These guys had some serious emotional and psychological issues before becoming a model, but the lifestyle is certainly not conducive to a man prone to depression," he says. "There wasn't anything unusual about staying in bed for a week or doing copious amounts of drugs to escape."
While Marr seems too much of a happy chap to succumb to this dark side, he says modelling has made him grow up. "I used to be a right little shit," he admits with a smile.
The new mature Marr does still make a few mistakes. After those December castings, he's in Tenerife with his mates during the crucial post-Christmas flurry when designers such as Tom Ford and Burberry – the big guns – are on the hunt for models. Back in London in time for the shows, he is booked for just two – Bobby Abley, the young London designer who is part of the MAN initiative, and Superdry, clothier to the masses. Watching him walk in Abley's show – with bunny ears and cartoon-printed top – followed by the hoodies and jeans of Superdry is a surreal snapshot of 24 hours in the life of a male model.
It turns out, though, it's one Marr is turning his back on, at least for the moment. He has been signed elsewhere – to play as a fullback for League Two side Chesterfield. "This is my last show for six months," he says, backstage at Superdry. "I hope I can come back to it."
Vickery has little doubt he can. "He's a classic cool boy, so has longevity," she says. "The football might even add to his appeal – clients these days want personality."
To be a male model seems like a transient stage in a young man's life, a moment in front of the camera on the way to something else. The prize might not be as greenbacked as Gisele's but – if the floodlights of a football pitch don't come calling – other rewards are certainly theirs for the taking.
One thing's for sure, though: a male Cara Delevingne won't be on the scene any time soon.
• This article was amended on Friday 7 March 2014 to correct the spelling of two names. Patrick McKenzie's name was formerly given as Patrick Kenzie and Josh Sangster as Josh Stagner.
Setting up the terms of her polemic against the fashion industry, Tansy Hoskins defines fashion in utilitarian terms as "changing styles of dress and appearance adopted by groups of people", and the industry as one in which there is "a shrinking distinction between high fashion and high street fashion". She does acknowledge that the whole business is both "glorious and enthralling, as well as exasperating and terrible", though she doesn't come close to conveying its appeal as well as Diana Vreeland once did: "Fashion must be the most intoxicating release from the banality of the world."
As fashion editor of Harper's Bazaar and then as editor of Vogue, Vreeland was once the ultimate fashion insider. Hoskins is an interested outsider, determined to change minds. So even though her intention is to show us what Karl Lagerfeld has to do with Karl Marx, she never represents fashion as the sigh of the soul in a soulless world. Stitched Up instead disapproves of the idea of fashion itself. And for good reasons: it focuses on the social consequences of the industry, from the conditions of workers to its disastrous environmental costs, collecting a number of useful, at times horrifying, facts in one place.
It is nearly a year since 1,133 garment workers died and 2,500 were injured in Bangladesh, when a poorly constructed factory collapsed just north-west of the capital, Dhaka. The discovery of the labels of western manufacturers in the rubble highlighted long supply chains and the practice of subcontracting at every stage. Amid the shocked reactions, some of the retailers could plausibly claim that they had no idea their clothes were made at Rana Plaza, or about the state of a building they didn't know existed. What happened in Bangladesh is a perfect starting point for Hoskins's attack, but she hasn't set out only to condemn the consumers of cheap fashion; she wants to show how the entire system is a trick to divert attention from how clothes are made, who actually wears them, and who makes all the money.
She goes for the high end. So while her book reminds us that Stefan Persson, the owner of H&M, bought a whole village in Hampshire in 2009, it dwells on the luxury conglomerates, the richest and most ruthless of which is LVMH (Louis Vuitton/Moët Hennessy), an intricate nest of companies that includes among its brands Christian Dior, Louis Vuitton and Céline. In the course of her convincing denial of the possibility of "ethical fashion", Hoskins tells the story of Edun, the clothing line started by Ali Hewson and her husband Bono. It began with the intention of manufacturing in sub-Saharan Africa, but after a poor initial reception, LVMH bought a 49% stake in the company in 2010 and immediately moved 85% of its manufacturing out of Africa – mainly to China.
At the other end of the scale, LVMH lost patience with Christian Lacroix, selling the house in 2005. The couturier filed for bankruptcy in 2009 and (like a select club of designers, such as Martin Margiela and Jil Sander) no longer has the rights to his own name. As Hoskins says a little gleefully he "now designs interiors and uniforms for train companies and collaborates with high‑street chains".
In 2012, Johann Rupert, the CEO of the much smaller Richemont (owner of Chloé and Dunhill) said: "I feel like I'm having a black-tie dinner on top of a volcano." Western luxury brands are very worried about China, in particular what will happen when a Chinese label becomes as prestigious as, say, Givenchy. Ever‑resourceful LVMH has been buying Indian brands, and in 2012 bought a stake in the Trendy International Group, a Chinese company specialising in casual wear. So for the time being at least, there is no immediate threat to the dominance of the brands who show in New York, Milan, London and Paris – especially given the way they are structured: 55% of Chanel's profits, for example, come from perfume and cosmetics. But change will inevitably come.
Hoskins is quite clear that high-end fashion is guilty of covering up a system of imitation and exploitation under the guise of novelty – so that a catwalk collection is immediately ripped off and copied by a mass-market retailer, and made up in a factory in Dhaka in appalling conditions. She is good on the question of "size zero", on advertising and on racism, too. Is Fashion Racist? asks one chapter heading. Of course it is. Hoskins reminds us of the Navajo nation suing Urban Outfitters, in a case that is still to be settled, for using its name on a range of products in 2012. Urban Outfitters' response was to argue that the tribe's federal trademark registration should be cancelled. She could also have reminded us of Dolce and Gabbana's "blackamoor" earrings for its spring 2013 collection, a surprising revival of an art deco jewellery fad. And Vogue India's "Slum Dwellers" shoot in 2008.
Stitched Up explores and analyses the existing industry, but also has another aim. The final three chapters – Resisting Fashion, Reforming Fashion and Revolutionising Fashion – take on a strangely programmatic tone, which can best be conveyed by the final chapter, in which Hoskins "imagines a post-capitalist society where capitalism has been overthrown and the world is in a state of permanent revolution". This reads rather like a pamphlet written by Central Committee. Perhaps it is enough to say that the garment industry ws vividly how the capitalist system works, and that labour is anything but immaterial in parts of the world where "our" clothes are made.
The great value of Stitched Up as polemic lies in its reminder that while very few of us can take the blame for the deaths of the three crocodiles needed to make an exclusive handbag (if you're tempted, there's a grim description), it is harder to absolve ourselves from other crimes of the global industry – from, for instance, the squandering of water to irrigate cotton crops that has led to the disappearance of the Aral Sea in Uzbekistan. The fashion industry is sizeist, it's racist, it's exploitative. Yet will it ever be overthrown? Do people want it to be? Even when its veils are stripped away, as they are in this book, we still so easily succumb to fashion's glamour and its fantasies of self-transformation. As Vreeland said: "I think fantasists are the only realists in the world. The world is a fantasy. Nothing's remarkably real."
Only five of the 27 global clothing brands linked to the Bangladesh factory that collapsed last year with the loss of 1,138 lives have committed to paying into a compensation fund for the victims.
The Clean Clothes Campaign, which wants improved conditions in the industry, said only Zara-owner Inditex, Mango, Canada's Loblaw, Denmark's Mascot and El Corte of Spain had committed to the fund, which is trying to raise $40m in time for the anniversary of the Rana Plaza factory disaster in April.
Several big British brands, including Primark and Matalan, are among the companies that have not paid into the fund, although Primark has paid the wages of workers laid off after the disaster. Other big brands connected to the factory include Walmart, Benetton and JC Penney. The collapse, the deadliest disaster in the history of the clothes industry, also left more than 2,000 injured.
The CCC campaign, which is supported by the International Labour Organisation (ILO), said it was "time for clothing brands to pay up".Global trade unions urged consumers to bombard their favourite brands with demands that they pay into the fund. "It is time to name, shame and campaign," said Monika Kemperle, assistant general secretary global trade union body IndustriALL. "On April 24, one year will have passed since the horror of Rana Plaza. No more excuses."
Frances O'Grady, general secretary of the TUC, wrote to Alessandro Benetton, the chairman of the fashion chain and heir to the family's $2bn fortune, to demand the Italian company pays into the fund.
"Nothing can be done to bring back those killed, or to reverse the psychological and physical scars that survivors will carry with them for the rest of their lives," she said. "However something can and should be done to alleviate the financial and health impacts."
O'Grady said Benetton's donation should "reflect the size of your company and take into account the direct relationship your company had with at least one of the factories in the building".
Ineke Zeldenrust of the CCC said: "Compensation efforts to date have been completely haphazard, unequal, unpredictable and non-transparent, and have left large groups of victims with nothing."
A spokesman for Primark, which is owned by Associated British Foods (ABF), which played a leading role in the immediate aftermath of the crisis, said it had "already paid short-term financial aid to all the employees at Rana Plaza, most of whom were making clothes for its competitors … and remains committed to paying long-term compensation to the workers employed by its supplier in the Rana Plaza building."
Donatella Versace's autumn/winter 2014 collection adds a touch of rock 'n' roll to Milan fashion week. This season the show takes a military theme: silk bias-cut dresses are detailed with military buttons and frogging, and tuxedos look like parade uniforms with jewel-encrusted epaulettes. 
 
The Observer's Jo Jones takes exclusive pictures of preparations before the show
Versace – not a label known for a low-key take on glamour – relaxed a little for the autumn/winter 2014 show. Taking place on Friday evening, as part of Milan fashion week, the usual body-conscious, rock star look was toned down. In its place were clothes that allowed their wearer to breathe easy.
The central concept was the bias-cut dress. A technique where the fabric is cut on the diagonal, bias cut allows for greater freedom of movement and skims rather than clings to the body. Here, it was utilised on simple – for Versace – designs, rather like slipdresses but with long sleeves and asymmetric hemlines. A white one, worn by Georgia May Jagger, showed a military influence – the gold buttons of a captain's jacket appeared on the belt around her waist, all embossed with the Medusa that is the Versace crest.
Some – including a fetching petrol blue dress, which designer Donatella Versace nominated as her favourite – had tiny splits along the seams, for a hint of the brand's trademark sex appeal. Other outfits included classic tuxedos in red, white and black, and – not forgetting the customer that likes her bling – a short suit which featured gold thread and crystals. Most models wore boots, some thigh-high and embellished with embroidery, and all were dripping in gold jewellery. The Versace muse is softened, but her glamour won't be dampened completely.
Donatella Versace said: "This is another part of the Versace woman. It's sensual, softer, but I always want the tough part too." This time, that came with the military details like the gold buttons and epaulettes on tuxedos, inspired by her brother Gianni and his collection of antique military uniforms. The collection had Donatella experimenting with a combination that nails that Versace look once again – just in a different way. "I feel very fortunate because the company is doing well," she said. "I feel confident."
Rumours of an IPO continue to swirl around Versace, bolstered by increased sales. In the latest figures, revenues grew 20% in 2012, to £335.9m. Speaking in April, chief executive Gian Giacomo Ferraris said the company might go public when they get to sales of €500m or €600m (£410m or £493m), a target that is expected to be reached in three to five years.
In December, it was revealed that investors are lining up to buy what would be a 20% stake in the company valued at £900m. CCMP Capital, an Italian private equity firm, are the frontrunners to invest.
One of their senior advisers is one of only three non-family members on the Versace board. Versace is privately owned by the Versace family. Donatella and her brother Santo hold 30% and 20% stakes respectively. Donatella's daughter, Allegra Versace Beck, has 50%.
Earlier in the day, two of Milan's minimalists showcased the flip side of Versace's Italian glamour. Emporio Armani's morning show ticked all the designer's boxes - with strong tailoring, a largely monochrome palatte and evening dresses, often in black velvet, that had an easy elegance. The playful use of pearls - which featured on seams of palazzo pants, decoration on dresses and fun gobstopper earrings - was new, and gave youthful verve to the 79-year-old's collection. Sportmax, the younger line from Maxmara, was also upbeat. While the cut of the clothes was simple and sleek, as expected, pattern and texture added a new dimension.
Leopard print dominated from the first look - a below the knee belted coat - and python, mohair and fur were also used. The best outfits here were the ones where these textures were juxtaposed. Leather obi belts over marble print party dresses would appeal to arty types. And a high-waisted midi-skirt worn with a cropped boiled wool sweater, both in leopard, scored approval from the front row.
On the first day of Milan fashion week, Gucci confounded expectations of high glamour with a collection for autumn/winter 2014 that was low key, covered up and cute.
The footwear said it all. In previous seasons the Gucci girl would surely not have stepped out in anything less than a 15cm heel.
This season, though, the models wore low-heeled boots up to their ankles or knees for a youthful ingénue look that had something of the 1960s about it.
The footwear was teamed with dresses flared from below the ribs, A-line skirts falling to just above the knee, and short double-breasted coats.
Some models wore oversized glasses, making fashion's more familiar faces – Anya Rubik, Joan Smalls – almost unrecognisable. Simple shift dresses and slim-fitting trouser suits referenced the clean lines that the creative director, Frida Giannini, was craving. "This is glamour at its purest," she said.
If Gucci is usually about evening wear, this collection was firmly pitched at daylight hours. The colour palette was easy to slot into city living: light shades with a bit of urban grit – plaster pink, pistachio green and slate grey mixed with ox-blood and ochre.
While a nappa leather shirt might be a bit much for the average work day, the Gucci customer will appreciate classics like these, given the house's trademark luxe spin with fabrics that might demand four-figure price tags. Giannini knows that even with her swerve towards the demure, she still needs to keep her loyal customers happy.
Pieces here played with the codes of the house, with "in the know" details sure to delight devotees.
The signature horse-bit hardware, which alludes to Gucci's history as an equestrian brand, and its classic loafer, was revised on those new boots and the Jackie bag, a style once worn by one Jackie O, was softer in unlined calfskin.
This being Gucci, there was eventually some concession to glamour. The last eight or so outfits of the 40-look show were evening-wear designs.
Those heels were finally in evidence, as knee-high boots, and they were worn with crystal encrusted dresses. Hems fell to just above the knee, and necklines were high, keeping that youthful feel.
The dresses were covered in sparkles (denoting the night) but the usual Gucci va-va-voom was still decidedly on the muted side. The red-carpet muse might indeed be Alexa Chung rather than Angelina Jolie.
It is likely that there is more of this to come from the Italian house. The menswear collection for Gucci, shown in January, had similar clean lines and a 1960s bent too, suggesting a new era.
With a brand still linked with the sexy aesthetic that Tom Ford injected into it in the 1990s, Giannini, who has been the company's creative director since 2006, is finally confident enough to put her own stamp on the designs.
For her bow at Wednesday's show in Milan, she appeared dressed in a version of what had just been on the catwalk: horse-bit boots, black slimfit trousers and a biker jacket.
Always chic, her personal style is now flowing into what she designs, with intriguing, and wearable, results.
The new direction has come at a potentially pivotal time. Gucci posted sales figures in October that were at a four-year low, rising just 0.6% in the final quarter of 2013.
The parent company, Kering, will be hoping that Giannini's more muted glamour will help the 85-year-old brand lure in a new generation of consumers wanting luxury.
After the shows in New York and London earlier this month, a dominant aesthetic is starting to emerge, which Gucci yesterday continued - pin-sharp but relaxed clothes, with a tomboy edge in London. The highlight of Milan will be the Prada show, which takes place Thursday at the brand's headquarters. Other standout shows during Milan include Versace on Friday evening and Giorgio Armani and Dolce & Gabbana both on Monday.
Here are three facts about the fashion industry. It is worth $1.5tn a year. It is one of the most globalised trades of them all, and has been since at least the British empire. It is also one of the very few businesses allowed to present itself as not being wholly about commerce.
For proof of that last point, simply look around you. At the moment, the fashion industry is in the middle of the first of its biennial marketing blitzes. Not that it is presented as such – instead, it is counted as news. Seasoned correspondents file from catwalks and media organisations, including this one, run live blogs from the runway shows. Meanwhile, the pricier glossies detail what you need to buy for those beach holidays and that the high street has dumped the merino for linen – which, as of this morning, feels as climatically appropriate as being assailed with a sprig of mistletoe in July.
But now and again the mask slips and all those column inches and picture galleries are called what they are: advertising. The press release for London fashion week, which ends on Tuesday, makes no bones about it: "UK media coverage each season exceeds £160m," while the value of foreign media publicity is put at £120m. Getting on for £300m of free promotion for a four-day trade show: not bad.
Much of the coverage, however, pretends that what's going on is an art show, or that style is some quality of a refined soul: up there with a grade eight on the violin.
In 2009, The Sartorialist posted a photo of a homeless man in New York. Under the caption "Not Giving Up", blogger Scott Schuman expressed delight at the destitute man's matching of blue glasses with blue shorts and boots. Readers concurred: "I love that although he is homeless, he hasn't forgotten about the color blue"; "You can just tell by looking at him that there's some sense of style wanting to be unleashed"; "LOVE the blue boots and wonder if they were a conscious choice or if they're simply something he was lucky enough to find in a dumpster. Either way, they're fab."
Every so often, the fashion world imitates Zoolander. In this case it was the film's launch of a new clothing range, Derelicte, "inspired by the very homeless, the vagrants, the crack whores that make this wonderful city so unique".
However distasteful, such obliviousness can be entertaining. The same goes for the self‑presentation of Karl Lagerfeld as mad scientist-cum-artistic genius. But whatever else the Chanel designer is, he is also a highly paid employee of a vast firm.
Fashion is among the most hyper-capitalist businesses of the lot – one that produces goods for short-term use (to be updated or thrown out every six months), sourced from all over the world and generating substantial profits for those at the top, even while those workers at the bottom face the risk of starvation (it is estimated that one in three textile workers in Cambodia are medically underweight) or death, as in the perennial textile factory deaths of the Indian subcontinent.
High fashion doesn't like being lumped in with the likes of Primark. It is about investment buys rather than fast fashion; ateliers not low-paid workers in the developing world. But in her new book, Stitched Up, Tansy Hoskins brings out the falsity of that opposition, through the diffusion ranges, the licensing of names and the outsourcing of production. Lagerfeld's Chanel makes 55% of its money from perfume and cosmetics. Ralph Lauren, Armani and Hugo Boss all manufacture in Bangladesh.
Hoskins also demonstrates just how monopolised fashion has become, so that 60% of the luxury goods market is concentrated in just 35 brands. Bernard Arnault sits atop an empire comprising Christian Dior, Louis Vuitton (LVMH) and Marc Jacobs, among many others, and is sufficiently rich and rightwing that he announced he was applying for Belgian citizenship for tax reasons. But fashion is one of those rare industries where, as Hoskins puts it, "monopoly brands" sit alongside monopoly media, and it is in neither's interest to annoy the other. For proof, look at the last September issue of US Vogue, with its 665 pages of advertising. Assuming the magazine charged its usual ad rates, then one issue of one edition of Vogue pulled in over $115m of marketing revenue alone.
Most other sectors wouldn't get away without at least some scrutiny of themselves as industries, of the toll on their workers and the environment. The diligent can read LVMH's results in the business section of the papers, but the rest of its trade is covered further forward in the book.
It is one of the great conjuring tricks of capitalism. And the result is to paint out the producer, the subcontinental woman in her unsafe factory. It means that disasters such as Rana Plaza in Bangladesh, which killed 1,133 people and injured 2,500, are treated as anomalies – rather than part of a system in which manufacture is outsourced to subcontractors who operate under a regulatory regime that can best be described as turning a blind eye. And it ignores the end product: the 350,000 tonnes of clothing go into landfill in Britain alone.
Once, we were fashion warriors. The land that gave the world the spinning jenny (a means of multispooling cotton that kickstarted the Industrial Revolution) was in the ascendancy for hundreds of years. When the decline came it was merciless. One by one the great manufacturers fled to Asia, where production and staff are cheap. The death throes saw the closure in 2000 of Courtaulds in Worksop (employing more than 1,000 people in its heyday) and Burberry's Rhondda Valley factory in 2007. Our biggest garment export became the machines that once dyed, spun and knitted.
By 2007 the Chinese town of Dalang, with the self-appointed soubriquet of Famous Knitting Sweater Town, had accumulated an arsenal of knitting machines with the capacity to produce an enormous 1.2bn pieces of knitwear per year. Some 90% of the clothes we wear now come from abroad, with a net import value of £12.5bn. Britain is still in the fashion game, obviously – we've provided a steady stream of world-class designers, quirky supermodels and fast-fashion retail barons – but the actual business of making clothes seemed dead.
So it feels pretty weird to be standing in Leicester, hearing the unmistakable clatter and hum of dyeing and fabric production at full tilt. And then again a few miles away in Hinckley, where the whirr of sewing machines accompanies 45 women creating piles of T-shirts in a white jacquard fabric as if nothing had ever changed. British fashion is apparently back in business.
Farago Fabrics is a textile-producing unit and dyehouse run by brothers Harvi and Suki Johal. This is one of 20 companies in the UK producing – actually physically producing – for Marks & Spencer's Best of British range, which launches its third collection at London Fashion Week tomorrow. Their father, Balwant, who came to Leicester in 1953, set up the factory as a denim processor and was essentially the king of stonewash until the 1980s when he watched that business evaporate. The Johals adapted. Rather than denim processing, Balwant's sons are all about the warp and weft of fabric production and the very technical process of dyeing fabric. Harvi describes textiles as a "passion". Suki, the money man, takes a more pragmatic view: "I have to admit we've toyed with the idea of leaving the UK altogether [the company has profitable facilities in Morocco and Dubai, also producing for high-street brands]. But Harvi, he's the one who really believed in it. Besides, people haven't stopped wearing clothes."
Quite, but M&S hopes that they will care that these are made on UK shores. So far so good. The first Best of British collection was a sell-out (admittedly it was only in five bricks-and-mortar stores, but it did very good online business) with several stand-out pieces, including a black pea coat and a beautiful swing coat in a pink and black check (we are still very good at coats in this country). The Customer Insight Unit (M&S's version of focus groups) found that consumers apparently value both the design and the investment in the quality that Best of British brings. Can being made in Britain help the retailer dodge the doldrums?
Certainly they're becoming bolder with the range. The summer collection will be in 50 stores (and online) and womenswear will produce four collections per year. The aesthetic of Best of British is interesting. As M&S style director Belinda Earl puts it: "The collections have been designed with an emphasis on traditional British craftsmanship, quality and attention to detail, but it's also been important to make sure there is a modernity to the collections' aesthetic, ensuring longevity and relevance for our customers." So no costume-British Sherlock Holmes-style tweed capes. Summer (which launches in store in May) includes a very modern floral dress in modal jersey, made and dyed by Farago Fabrics, a digitally printed in many (but not quite 50) arresting shades of grey.
A criticism might be that as Best of British is a niche collection – albeit one that's growing (90 pieces of menswear and womenswear launch for spring 2014 at London Fashion Week) – M&S is just paying lip service to UK manufacture. The retailer argues that it is committed, though it won't make any claims that British manufacture is coming home. It stresses that the UK is currently its seventh-biggest production location for clothing and home, worth £230m per year.
Harvi stops to admire the digital fabric printer (no screens necessary), as excited as Charlie Bucket. "This…this is hi-tech. Look at the detail in the print!" The grey floral design begins to appear. It will go back into the dyehouse 100m away to take in more colour.
Of course this has all taken significant investment. "We've gone the green route with our dyeing machines, using a fraction of the water and energy of the old style," confirms Harvi. Surprisingly – as British manufacture is often discussed in terms of slow fashion – one of the big sells of this enterprise is speed. "Speed plus quality. That's what it's all about," says Harvi. "It's probably fine to source basics from the Far East as you can plan those ahead, but the fashion end, where you need to be creative and on-trend, doesn't work on longer lead times. We're so close to the source, we are the source!"
Gill Marjoram, of Leeann Fashions in Hinckley, Leicestershire, began sewing in a factory at the age of 15 (she informs me she's well past pension age now). When M&S arrived to place a Best of British order she and her team of 45 "girls" were ready. Depending on the complexity of the garment they can produce 5,000-10,000 pieces a week. She started Leeann Fashions in a council unit in 1982, setting up sewing machines when the rest of the industry was leaving. "There have been tough times – we were down to about 10 in here at one point," she admits. "But I always kept faith in this factory. It was a surprise to see trade coming back. I suppose I never thought I would. But for the past six to nine months we have really tried to get going. The Best of British collection has given me the strength to go out and get it."
Can the UK really be a contender again? After a 20-year career in high street fashion, including stints as a senior fashion buyer for the likes of M&S and Debenhams, Kate Hills has set up makeitbritish.co.uk, dedicated to bringing production back to the UK. In June she will launch the first trade show for buyers, brands, factories and makers – bringing them all together at the Old Truman Brewery in east London. It's a chance also to quantify what's out there. Hills says she has a database of around 1,000 factories and units, but nobody knows for sure what's left of the industry.
The following manufacturers are missing in action or possibly extinct: component makers for lingerie, shirting producers for men's formal shirts, a maker of high-heeled women's boots and general lining makers. Doubtless these absences have been noted by M&S buyers trying to put Best of British together.
"But I do feel the time is right to bring the rag trade back to the UK in a meaningful way," says Hills. "I know at least half a dozen factories with the potential to produce at decent scale [tens of thousands of units a week]. I've just visited another factory employing 50 to 60 women in the Midlands that was so hi-tech you could eat your dinner off the floor. Serious investment has gone into it because the owners see an opportunity. Providing the fabric is in stock this factory can get an order out within a week. A week!"
That's the good news, but there are concerns. "Things are coming back, but slower than they should be," concedes Hills. "We still lack infrastructure. And the challenges manufacturers face are consistent orders and continuity of orders." Meanwhile, the loss of manufacturers continues. Most recently – and despite a ton of publicity and, apparently, a healthy order book – Headen & Quarmby, manufacturers of, among other things, Mary Portas's Kinky Knickers range, went into administration, citing "cash flow" issues.
Despite M&S's orders, industry insiders warn that it's still dangerous for manufacturers to become dependent on a retailer which could develop commercial wanderlust and leave once more. So today's manufacturers seem determined to do things differently.
James Eden is a new-style rag trade entrepreneur. With a Cambridge degree and a city career under his belt, he bought the Manchester factory once owned by his family and now produces outerwear for many of the big brands. Crucially, he has also launched his own menswear label, Private White VC, named after his great grandfather, a Victoria Cross recipient. The label's designer is Nick Ashley (son of Laura), and local provenance is everything to it.
Ultimately the health of British fashion manufacture may well rest on whether we can develop the skillbase we need fast enough. "No more designers please!" says Kate Hills, only slightly joking. "If my kids want to go into fashion, I want them making something as an apprentice." There is hope. Asos has invested in a stitching school. M&S, with the British Fashion Council, has set up apprenticeships through the non-profit social enterprise, Fashion Enter.
"This was a fantastic industry, employing so many ladies," says Gill Marjoram. "You earn good money and you buy a car, a house. It's super that it could be like that again. In the next three months, every machine here will be full. There will be bums on seats. But we can't deny we're getting older. There's girls here I've worked with for 40 years and we're training as many youngsters as we can. I've got the time, and I will give them the attention. I've taken in 12 [since the Best of British contract] and only one was no good."
She points out a group of young trainee machinists who are about to join the main pool. "They will sit next to one of my experienced ladies. You see, when they come here they're joining a community and learning a skill for ever. They'll make their own wedding dress, probably. They'll alter their clothes. We don't do disposable fashion. But they'll have a job they can be proud of. They deserve that."
All clothes from Best of British at marksandspencer.com, only at selected stores nationwide
Success in fashion has always been about who you know. For a designer, the more glamorous and famous your friends are, the more fabulous you look. Get them to wear your clothes and you're truly golden – if you're associated with the A-list, regular people will queue up to buy your clothes. Take the partnerships between Valentino and Elizabeth Taylor or Hubert de Givenchy and Audrey Hepburn.
But such stylish pairings are no longer enough. Designers now follow the Yves Saint Laurent school of branding, and curate an entourage around themselves and their brand. Yves did it in the 70s, dressing friends such as Loulou de la Falaise and Betty Catroux in his designs, and heading to Le Sept. These days, the process is more carefully orchestrated, and essential to a brand's operation. Who knows if these collectives are real BFFs – does Alexa Chung go over to Henry Holland's to watch the Celebrity Big Brother final?Is Riccardo Tisci on Skype all evening with Kimye? Who cares? They look great. Here's our rundown of the designer gangs to know now.
The look Lagerfeld is a master at walking the line between classic, established beauties and new talent. Somehow, it never looks contrived – possibly because they all have a signature Chanel look: willowy, with eyeliner and an enviable chain accessory.
Potential future members Lagerfeld has been cultivating Hudson Kroenig – the young son of model Brad – as a male muse since he was in nappies. The little boy recently walked the finale of Chanel's couture show. Julia Roitfeld's daughter Romy might be under two, but she's a safe bet, too.
How to infiltrate That might be tricky. Unless you have breeding that will gain entry into Debrett's or are the child of one of Lagerfeld's inner circle, jog on.
The look The fashion world is still waiting for Ghesquière's Louis Vuitton debut in March, but his 15 years at Balenciaga give us an idea of who to expect in the front row. This is all about brunettes with glossy hair and preferably a scowl.
Potential future members Rebecca Hall is primed and ready to go for Ghesquière. She's clever, brunette and increasingly into fashion.
How to infiltrate Practise not smiling, rework your bedhead hair and buy Ghesquière-era Balenciaga on eBay.
The look Angular, in a band and wearing classic rock'n'roll pieces only, please. Slimane's vision for Saint Laurent is Instagram-friendly luxe grunge. Think (very) skinny jeans, Chelsea boots and striped mohair.
Potential future members You'll find these in the latest issue of NME. We'd say the Districts and Black Gold Buffalo – young, cool and rock'n'roll – have a good chance.
How to infiltrate Basically, if you're in a band and wear a lot of black, Slimane wants to hear from you.
The look Jacobs loves someone with a naughty smirk, and most of those who fill his phone book have the requisite qualities. Introducing Kate Moss at last year's British Fashion Awards, he called her a "perfectly imperfect girl". You get the picture.
Potential future members It can't be long before singer Ariana Grande ditches the squeaky-clean image.
How to infiltrate Jacobs is focusing on his own line, after balancing it with work at Louis Vuitton for 10 years. That means more time in New York. The HQ is in SoHo. Just saying.
The look Glamorous, a bit gothic, but with sportswear detailing. Tisci is a master at this odd but very modern combination. Kardashian's Met Ball dress – a floor-length floral number with gloves – is your reference point.
Potential future members North West. Tisci was one of a number of designers to send the alpha baby mini designer goods. He's the only one, though, to have been pictured holding her on Instagram.
How to infiltrate There are two strands to the Givenchy gang: hip-hop royalty or the arty side of fashion. So make friends with Kanye or get a job on a style magazine.
The designers Henry Holland and House of Holland.
The look These guys are all about fun – something that gels with Holland's catwalk look. Colours are bright, prints are daft and an inside joke is only a nudge away.
Potential future members Tiger Lily Hutchence, now 17, is probably in with her big sisters' mates, so it's only a matter of time. Harry Styles – who attended Chung's birthday party – is on the periphery.
How to infiltrate Going out on London's club scene is a start. Nick Grimshaw is reportedly moving to Hackney, so E8 is your port of call.
When Danielle Sheypuk rolled down the runway at designer Carrie Hammer’s debut this week, she became the first-ever model in a wheelchair to be featured at New York Fashion Week. Hammer’s show, which featured role models instead of runway models, has since received global attention, putting Sheypuk and Hammer at the center of a debate about the fashion industry’s unrealistic beauty standards.
And that’s exactly where they want to be.
We spoke with Sheypuk (DS) and Hammer (CH), who met at a cerebral palsy luncheon and became fast friends, about the show and their shared goal to change the fashion industry.
DS: It was a surreal experience that continues to bring me goosebumps every time I think of it. I remember most turning the corner from backstage and facing the audience and the catwalk. I felt sexy and glamorous. Most importantly, I felt like all of the other models there. We were all women who have achieved significantly and made outstanding contributions to our community. I just happened to use a wheelchair.
DS: People were excited and enthusiastic. Many said such phrases as “Thank God” and “It’s about time!” I feel like people welcomed me with open arms and I hope that the fashion industry does the same. Carrie Hammer’s show was completely wheelchair accessible. Before we knew that though, Carrie and I were joking that we would build a ramp ourselves if we had to! I did attend the closing show in the Mercedes-Benz tents at Lincoln Center. I have to say that I was disappointed to see only steps at the entrance. I had to find the ramp myself which was located down an alleyway in the rear of the tents – not a glamorous entrance at all and again feeding into the negative image that people with disabilities do not belong at Fashion Week. I hope to see that this will be improved for Fashion Week spring 2014.
DS: I’m a successful psychologist who works hard for her money and I like to spend it! A few of my favorite designers are Christian Louboutin, Gucci, Dolce and Gabbana, Chanel, Diane Von Furstenberg, Jimmy Choo, Derek Lam, and Alice and Olivia. I think it’s very important for the spectrum of fashion designers (low- to high-end designers) to recognize their consumers with disabilities, and I don’t think that any designer really does a good job at that. We are essentially never pitched to, and virtually ignored when it comes to fashion.
DS: There are still many negative stereotypes regarding people with disabilities that, unfortunately, continue to be very prevalent. In general, people with disabilities are considered to be not sexy, asexual, pitiful, helpless, and frumpy just to name a few. This terrible image is the complete opposite of what fashion is trying to represent. These stereotypes simply are not true and people with disabilities are consumers of fashion – which is exactly why more designers should have the foresight that Carrie had and incorporate models with disabilities.
CH: I don’t think emerging designers are featuring “real women” because as a new designer you want to do everything you can to look like the big guys. For there to be big change it has to start from the top and trickle down to the emerging brands. My overall goal is for fashion to empower women and not demoralize them through negative and sometimes false imagery. It’s so important to me that young women are looking up to role models not runway models. For this to be widespread, we need industry adoption at the highest level. The show was a step in reversing the trend, so hopefully we’ll start to see models that better represent a cross-section of all women.
CH: I really didn’t care. It didn’t even factor into my thought process. I was just so excited about the idea and the role models really rallied around the show. Having the role models did distract from the clothes because the women shone so brightly while wearing them – but the distraction was part of the point. The show’s goals were two fold: change the world and show off my collection .
DS: No, I’m not surprised. Carrie and I knew that we’d done something significant that could possibly change the way the fashion industry views people with disabilities. However, we also knew that the industry is a tough nut to crack, so to speak, so we worked our butts off to promote to the press and social media what we were doing.
CH: I was expecting some press after the show for the innovative idea, but I didn’t expect this much! I couldn’t be more excited about the coverage. My goal has always been to improve body image among women and girls. The attention is helping me achieve it.
CW: Ready-to-wear and standard sizing were a good idea initially, but I think it’s screwing with a woman’s body image. Women go to personal trainers and say: “I want to be a size four.” But this is a ridiculous statement because that number doesn’t mean anything. Women are calculating their perceived worth and beauty based upon completely made-up numbers.
Every clothing company decides the measurements of their sizes. Once they decide what type of measurement best fits their customer (straight bodied, curvy, etc) they hire a fit model, who is usually a size four or six to fit the sample on. To get smaller or larger sizes fashion brands mathematically “grade” the size up or down based upon the dimensions of the original fit model. But that just doesn’t work. There are too many body types to ever be able to do this effectively.
Women beat themselves up over not being able to fit in a certain brand, but there is a very simple answer – you have different dimensions than the arbitrary fit model. Even the fit models don’t have perfect dimensions (which is their job). I went to a fit model casting once to see what it was like, and almost all the fit models either wore padded bras or butt pads to make them perfectly dimensional by industry standards. If the fit model doesn’t even have the body of a fit model, the rest of us are toast!
DS: It’s a position I take very seriously. It’s someone that the entire community will feel proud to emulate and will feel comfortable seeking advice from. I’ve lived my entire life with a disability and I constantly apply what I’ve learned, my own personal experience, as well as my professional expertise as a psychologist to understand what others with disabilities are going through and to try to make positive changes. As a role model, I have taken it on as my job to change the negative way that society views people with disabilities both in the areas of dating and fashion.
The scene less than 24 hours before Zimmermann’s second New York fashion week show is surprisingly calm. Never mind that the shoes arrived from Brazil only yesterday (a tropical storm at departures, followed by a snowstorm at arrivals), there are still three models to cast and fit, and this will be the label’s first autumn-winter collection to show at fashion week. There is an eerie, but organised, quiet.
The scene outside is far more chaotic; snow-dumped city streets, subzero temperatures and hazardous footpaths. But even the most treacherous of weather conditions do not seem to dampen the collective spirits of New York’s fashion faithful.
At one end of the rented studio space in Manhattan’s Fashion District, seamstresses tend to alterations, while styling assistants hover around designer Nicky Zimmermann, awaiting instruction. At the other end sister and business partner Simone Zimmermann, who stands amid the casting agents, is still deliberating over the remaining three runway spots.
Nicky Zimmermann is, by her own accounts, an “over-organised Virgo”. When she anticipated the demanding new collection (“It’s winter, these are big garments and they’re complicated”) she requested another machinist from her sister, who controls the purse strings. The collection was fitted in Sydney, with Zimmermann and her chief stylist doing “guesstimate” alterations. It was then transported to New York eight days before the show. Zimmermann admits she has “out-organised” herself.
She has had time to perfect such planning, thanks to a long and prolific career. But it continues to throw up challenges – in this case producing winter coats every bit as desirable as the sexy swimwear that Zimmermann is best known for. The American market requires an understanding of winter: while bikinis and flirty dresses will sell in Los Angeles, Sydney or at the imminent East Hamptons store, New Yorkers need their fashion with decidedly more cloth.
“It was something I wanted to address early on, here in America. I didn’t want to look like a swim brand doing autumn/winter,” Zimmerman says.
“Early on” might seem oxymoronic for a brand that was founded in 1991, but this push into the US has the air of a second wind for the Sydney-based business. What began with a lone rack of homemade dresses at Paddington markets in the city has grown to 14 standalone boutiques in Australia, one in LA and another in New York, and hundreds of stockists worldwide.
In terms of fashion week, Zimmermann is a small fish in a very large pool, trying to build the label in a competitive and tight-knit fashion community. The brand is for now committed to twice-yearly shows in New York – even at the cost of Australian fashion week (they’ll do “something”, just not on-schedule) – but is relegated to the opening days of the fashion week schedule, which builds to a crescendo of big names and spectacular shows. It is something of a reality check for a business comfortable with being the marquee act back home.
And a new market also means exposing the brand to the glare of a new media pack. Last spring Zimmermann found themselves the subject of plagiarism accusations, strongly denied, after a Belgian lingerie designer highlighted a bikini top from Zimmerman’s spring 2014 collection that bore a resemblance to one of her own bestselling designs. In a statement Nicky Zimmermann said it was “disappointing and untrue”.
Friday morning dawns, and things are noticeably less calm then 24 hours before – there’s a frenetic energy backstage where a team of people prepare for the first run-through ahead of the day’s show. “Remember, turn left only for finale,” a visibly stressed show caller tells his pack of models; steamers gurgle as final creases are eased from the collection; and makeup artists survey the models, armed with lipstick and hairpins.
Lining the room are racks of clothing: oversized houndstooth suiting, richly textured dresses in orchid prints, and renegade bikie jackets with tough hardware. It’s a moody collection that sure looks wintry – and there’s not a bikini in sight.
The Zimmermann sisters look only slightly more flustered than yesterday; as media hover wanting shots with models and quick news grabs, they willingly oblige. Despite the calm, Nicky assures me she still gets nervous, but also places enormous pressure on herself, “We’re always asking ourselves how can we improve, how can we do it better, how can we put on a better show?”
Out the front, the 450-capacity tent slowly fills up with Australian media and celebrities making their presence known in the front row. For 15 quick minutes the pavilion comes alive to the booming presence of a runway show. The models remember to turn left, applause is forthcoming and then it’s over.
No parent would want toxic materials in their children's clothing. Yet according to a new Greenpeace study a range of hazardous chemicals is being used in the production of kids' wear from top fashion brands.
A frequent question about producing toxin-free clothing is whether it is economically feasible for textile companies to replace hazardous chemicals with safer alternatives. The answer is resoundingly yes; doing so is essential if companies want to keep their business sustainable.
The global textile industry is notorious for using potentially hazardous chemicals. According to research, more than 550 types of dyes and over 3,000 chemicals of auxiliaries containing carcinogenic chemicals, hormone disruptors, or heavy metals, are restricted for use in textile products under the laws of different countries.
Research published by Greenpeace found that some of the chemicals widely used in the textile industry are toxic to reproductive development in mammals or interfere with the hormone system. And children may be more sensitive to the effects of these hazardous chemicals than adults. A recent UNEP and WHO report supported the proposition that the timing of some impacts caused by hormone disruptors can be critical, particularly for growing children.
There is global concern over this issue (half a million people signed up to the Greenpeace DETOX campaign within days of its launch in 2012) and it has created far-reaching impacts within the global textile industry. Some leading players within the industry such as Benetton have moved to address the problem with a policy of implementing strict controls over its supply chain. Other companies have worked closely with their suppliers, often located in developing countries, to understand what is being used in the production of their products and what safer substitutes might be.
Entire groups of toxic chemicals, previously ubiquitous in the supply chain, have been phased out by such companies within a short period of time – for example, biodegradable biopolymer and fluorocarbon-free water repellent materials are used as safer alternatives. More importantly, these companies have created incentives for "upstream" players in the textile supply chain, those who provide dyes and detergents, to weigh-in and start vying for a share in the market for safer alternatives.
High-end British brand Burberry this week committed to start disclosing the chemical discharges of its suppliers in the global south by the end of June 2014. And by 1 July 2016, the fashion house says it will eliminate all per- and poly-fluorinated chemicals from its supply-chain. This opens a new chapter in the story of toxic-free fashion and raises the bar for the luxury sector. Brands such as Gucci, Versace and Louis Vuitton now risk getting left behind.
Textile industry meetings in Beijing or Shanghai are now filled with energetic chemical engineers showing greener product lines to their potential customers in the textile business. Companies such as Mango have even produced detailed timelines about when their safer substitutes will be available in the next few years. This kind of market dynamic will almost certainly make safer alternatives more available and accessible for textile industry players who are aiming at providing toxic-free products for their customers.
Early birds have an advantage. Across the globe regulations are kicking in that will force the textile industry to shift to toxin-free mode. More stringent regulation will be the reason that brands will eventually have to change to safer alternatives.
In 2013, the textile industry was listed for the first time under China's national five-year plan for prevention and control of environmental risk of chemicals as a "key industry for regulatory control". The signal sent by regulators in the world's largest textile producing country is very clear: no more toxic clothing in our backyard.
The central government of China is also expected this year to release a blacklist of toxic chemicals that will be subject to strict regulatory control. Some of them are major chemicals used by the textile industry.
These developments indicate that textile brands should move fast to catch up not only with consumer preferences but also regulatory intentions. The earlier the brands catch the trend, the more "first mover advantage" they can enjoy.
Chih Ann Lee is the Detox campaigner for Greenpeace East Asia office
• This article was amended on 7 February 2014 to clarify that 550 types of dyes and over 3,000 chemicals are restricted by laws of various countries, not solely China as originally stated.
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Patterned knitwear and yellow fisherman jackets appeared en masse in a chilly warehouse in east London this weekend, as 2,500 fans of the Scandinavian crime genre attended Nordicana, a two-day convention dedicated to the culture of emotionally detached detectives investigating murders among minimalist furniture and grey skies.
Amid the stalls selling Killing merchandise, smoked salmon, vodka and Swedish onesies for children, the biggest draw of the weekend were screenings of the shocking final two episodes of bleak Swedish/Danish crime drama The Bridge, which concluded its second series on Saturday night on BBC4.
The show's co-stars Kim Bodnia and Sofia Helin, who play the lead detectives Martin Rohde and Saga Norén, fielded questions from a packed hall of fans. "No character has ever affected me in so many ways as Saga," said Helin of her character's uniquely direct style. "To have Saga on my shoulder, she helps me to think about facts in certain situations. She helps me." Bodnia, meanwhile, was full of praise for the BBC and British television: "It's amazing that you can find a place to be free and work. What you're doing out there is amazing."
There was more levity in a panel for the unlikely hit political drama Borgen about the intricacies of Danish coalition government, which brought together actors Sidse Babett Knudsen and Pilou Asbaek - who played prime minister Birgitte Nyborg and her spin doctor Kasper Juul. . There was an implication from Knudsen, by way of an exaggerated nod, that she had been asked to run for political office in real life, and she expanded on her previous comments that Tony Blair had worked his way into her portrayal of Birgitte Nyborg during the final season. "The only thing that really inspired me about Tony Blair was that he became that character he was playing, that you could see from miles away."
Asbaek revealed that the show's producer Camilla Hammerich was forced to write his broken knee into the script after a footballing accident, and simply reused, word for word, the real-life dressing down she had given him. "Oh my god, I could have killed him!" exclaimed Hammerich. A number of viewers have interpreted this injury as a comment on the Danish healthcare system.
Danish broadcasters DR, who made Borgen and The Killing, used the convention to air the first UK screening of its big new drama The Legacy, a dense family drama about the division of an estate. The series was recently bought up by Sky Arts.
Alex Ayran, who runs the Nordic Noir DVD distribution chain and organised the event, seemed pleased at the success of Nordicana, which is the second such convention and follows a smaller debut last summer. "The interest of the British public in Scandinavian crime fiction, food, design, culture, is absolutely huge," he explains, adding that he was not surprised that the first day proved a sellout. He believes its popularity is down to the sheer quality of Scandinavian output. "The TV shows are so good, so intriguing, that it's almost otherworldly."
In addition to the screenings and celebrity panels, entry (£40 for the weekend or £25 for a single day) gave access to more niche offerings. In A Great Scandinavian Cinnamon Bun-Off, the composer of Borgen's theme tune tasted a selection of cinnamon buns, while Eat Like a Scandi revealed the secrets of Scandinavian cooking. There was also a so-called expo room in which visitors could take a break from murder plots and leaden skies to explore some of Scandinavia's happier output and Nordicana merchandise (a Keep Calm and Watch The Killing T-shirt will set you back £15). One of the stallholders, Stacey, said that in addition to The Bridge and Borgen DVDs, her most popular items were teatowels and tote bags, both of which bear the Nordicana 2014 name and a pattern akin to Sara Lund's infamous Faroe-style knit. But as Saturday reached an end, she said there had also been a big rush on fleece jackets.
"People have been complaining of the cold," she explained, which seemed rather apt.
When Kate Moss rocked up to Glastonbury in 2005 in a pair of Hunter wellies and denim hotpants, she certainly put the Scottish brand on the fashion map. Now the world of high fashion and wellingtons are set to collide again as Hunter prepares to send models down the catwalk in boots at London fashion week this month. "We have always maintained that a unique opportunity exists to develop Hunter from a British heritage brand into a global lifestyle brand," said its creative director, Alasdhair Willis.
The move sees Hunter vying for a place alongside British clothing brands such as Burberry, Barbour and Mulberry which have shaken off dowdy reputations to reinvent themselves as covetable fashion brands capable of dressing the affluent from Buenos Aires to Beijing.
Hunter's chances of success are bolstered by strong links to the fashion world. Willis is half of a fashion power couple – his wife is designer Stella McCartney – while its global design director, Niall Sloan, was previously a designer at Burberry. It also has financial firepower, after US private equity firm Searchlight bought a stake in the business in 2012. Originally the North British Rubber Company, it has a long history for Willis to draw on. Founded in Edinburgh in 1856 by American entrepreneur Henry Lee Norris, its manufacturing operation expanded rapidly when, following the outbreak of the first world war, it was asked to "construct a sturdy boot suitable for the conditions in flooded trenches".
Boasting Royal Warrants from both the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh, the brand has long been a favourite with the home counties green welly brigade, but following unofficial celebrity endorsements from the likes of Sarah Jessica Parker and the Olsen Twins, the wellies are now as likely to be seen in Manhattan as Sandringham. In 2012, turnover was in touching distance of £75m.
International catwalk shows are usually reserved for rarefied designer brands such as Dior, Chanel and Givenchy, but in recent years ambitious high street brands have started to take advantage of these fashion summits which draw the gaze of the world's media. Last year, Whistles, run by former Topshop boss Jane Shepherdson, took the plunge by hosting its first invite-only seated show at London fashion week.
"Commercial brands like Hunter and Whistles have a lot of potential reasons for showing during fashion week, despite not quite fitting in with the 'designers' we expect to see there," says Dhani Mau, associate editor of Fashionista.com. "One is to get the validation that potentially comes with being associated with an event like New York or London fashion week. Another is that it puts the designer on an international stage, giving brands who want to expand internationally the opportunity to present to press and buyers from across the globe." She also gives the example of J Crew, Michelle Obama's favourite brand. It started showing at New York fashion week, which turned out to be a precursor to entering the UK market. "It will be interesting to see whether or not editors will make time for these commercial brands in their schedules," says Mau. "Fashion people love Whistles, but we wonder if Hunter will be able to drum up the same excitement."
Not all brands are able to make the transition to global powerhouse as Burberry has done, with worldwide sales of £2bn. Mulberry is currently in the doldrums after its attempt to move upmarket hits bumps in the road. The label has abandoned customers prepared to pay £150-£500 for a handbag in a bid to become a full-scale designer brand that appeals to high-spending shoppers in Asia – its Alexa satchel starts at £800 but can cost up to £1,250 – but profits are sharply down as it encounters stiff competition.
Despite the resurgence in popularity brought about by the "Kate Moss effect", Hunter's return to glory has not been straightforward. High manufacturing costs were blamed for a collapse into administration in 2006, and two years later it called time on production in Scotland with the closure of its plant at Heathhall, near Dumfries.
"Hunter was born out of a passion to innovate, advances in manufacturing techniques and a British thirst for discovery," says Willis. "The vision for the brand is to celebrate that pioneering spirit and its rich heritage, making it relevant for today's customer."
The fashion show will preview its new clothing range, which includes a "water-resistant original clear smock", a garment which sounds suspiciously like a cagoule, and a bespoke version of its Hunter Original boots that were first produced in 1956.
The unveiling of the new-season fashion campaigns always causes a ripple of excitement, but what's got us most interested isn't Lady Gaga done up as Donatella for Versace's spring summer ads or how Daria Werbowy found the time to star in all her campaigns, but a new face: 26-year-old fashion blogger Jillian Mercado.
Mercado stars in the new campaign for Diesel, alongside the artist James Astronaut, shot by the influential fashion photographers Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin. Fashion bloggers have long been considered the new "stars" of the industry, so it's no real surprise there – and Mercado is certainly stylish and has an extraordinary face – but she isn't exactly your traditional model: she was diagnosed with spastic muscular dystrophy as a child, and has used a wheelchair since she was 12.
Mercado, who writes the blog Manufactured 1987 and is executive editorial director of We the Urban digital magazine, knew Diesel's artistic director Nicola Formichetti through work. Still, she didn't expect to get anywhere when she (along with some of her friends) entered themselves for Diesel's open casting call in the summer. "I didn't put much hope in it. It was just something I did for fun."
She is clearly thrilled. "It means so much to me because it's the fact that someone who is different is representing Diesel," she says. "[It shows] anyone can rock the clothes and look beautiful. For me it represents way more than just a campaign. A lot of people will see it and will have a change of mind of how they see people who have a disability."
Mercado chose to go into an industry not exactly known for its inclusivity or broad ideas about what constitutes "beautiful". But she grew up, born and raised in New York, with an interest in fashion – her mother was a seamstress, her father worked in a shoe store – and she went on to study at the Fashion Institute of Technology. "I knew how narrow minded the fashion industry could be," she says, but she didn't see why that should stop her. "If you want to do something, it takes dedication but it doesn't matter what other people say. Be you and go for it – I try to keep that in mind." But she found, she says, that "the industry has always welcomed me. I'm always aware of negative looks or things people say but I've been welcomed and people respect me for who I am. The industry is moving forward."
There has been a small push in recent years to get the fashion industry to embrace a wider range of beauty – the organisation Models of Diversity is one group which campaigns for this, All Walks Beyond the Catwalk is another. But representations of disability are all but invisible once you reach the top tiers of the fashion industry (the athlete and actor Aimee Mullins, who starred in Alexander McQueen's catwalk show in 1998 and has been a L'Oreal ambassador, appears to be the lone exception).
"I hope something does happen, or continues to happen, like this [campaign]," says Mercado. "People should have an open mind. If I'm helping to make it move forward, that's awesome."
The shooting of Cambodian garment factory workers on strike over low wages (Retailers tackle Cambodian PM over shootings, 21 January) is yet another example of the impact that making our clothes can have on people far away. It's right that clothing brands call for an investigation. But there are many problems linked to the making of our everyday products, from unfair pay and dangerous working conditions to environmental destruction. To help prevent these, a range of solutions is needed.
A first step is greater transparency about the impacts companies have. It's disappointing, therefore, that the UK government is trying to water down proposed new EU rules requiring all large companies to report on these impacts. The fact that only 6% of large EU companies report annually on these issues shows the voluntary approach isn't working. The government says it is committed to greater corporate transparency. Vince Cable has the opportunity to show this by supporting strong EU regulation to ensure all large companies – both listed and unlisted – are required to report on their full supply chains, in compliance with the UN guiding principles on business and human rights.
Peter Frankental Economic relations programme director, Amnesty International
Neil Thorns Director of advocacy, Cafod
Laura Taylor Head of advocacy, Christian Aid
Marilyn Croser Coordinator, Core Coalition
Andy Atkins Executive director, Friends of the Earth
Philippa Bonella Head of communications and education, SCIAF
Catherine Howarth CEO, Share Action
Nicola Smith Head, economic and social affairs department, TUC
Trevor Hutchings Director, UK and EU advocacy, WWF-UK
• At first I was cheered to read that "dozens of the world's biggest clothing brands … have demanded Cambodia's PM explain the use of 'deadly force' against striking miners" and that they're demanding thorough investigation. Great, they wanted the workers' pay increased and their conditions improved too, I thought. Alas not, it turned out; all they were worried about was industrial unrest damaging their confidence in Cambodia as a "stable sourcing location" with cheap labour costs. No change there then.
Robert Sanderson
Managing director, Nottingham Theatre Royal & Royal Concert Hall
• This article was amended on 23 January 2014 to correct one of the signatories on the lead letter
The reality of working life for fashion models has been obscured by the lifestyles of a few rich and famous individuals, characterised by the statement of supermodel Linda Evangelista: "We don't wake up for less than $10,000 a day".
But modelling is a highly competitive, deregulated industry beset with exploitation, debt and abuse in which many of the workers are children. Sara Ziff is a model who founded the Model Alliance, a New York-based non-profit organisation working to establish fair labour standards. In 2013 the Model Alliance successfully campaigned for the introduction of legislation that gives fashion models under 18 the same protections as other child performers in New York.
Despite this success, child labour remains a serious concern for the Model Alliance. "Traditionally the industry has not distinguished between kids who model as kids, and kids who model as adults. And since the industry relies heavily on a labour force of children, it's common for girls ... to be put in adult situations that they don't have the maturity to handle," explains Ziff. "Sexual harassment and abuse are problems in many industries, and modelling is no exception."
In addition to the issue of the industry's treatment of young girls, there is also the impact on society of beauty standards being aligned with pre-pubescent and extremely thin girls. "A girl who has an adolescent physique should not set the standard for feminine beauty in a women's magazine," continues Ziff. "It puts pressure on that girl to prevent her body from developing, and it sets an unrealistic, unhealthy standard for the women who consume those images."
Adult models have to resort to extreme measures to maintain a pre-pubescent look in order to get work and to fit into sample sizes and there is also the problem of the Euro-centric nature of this singular version of beauty which compounds an already notoriously racist industry.
Research published in 2011 (PDF) by LSE economist Dr Joan Costa-Font and Professor Mireia Jofre-Bonet of City University concluded that eating disorders are "socially formed" and that "body image" refers to the place "where body, mind and culture meet". It stated that there should be government intervention to alleviate social pressure on women (90% of people suffering from eating disorders like anorexia nervosa and bulimia are women) by, for example, regulating against the use of underweight models in the fashion industry and in women's magazines.
In June 2012 in response to growing controversy around the impact of the fashion industry on society, and following a particularly inappropriate fashion spread by Vogue Paris featuring a 10-year old, Condé Nast launched the Vogue Health Initiative. The pact pledged that no Vogue editor would "knowingly work with models under the age of 16 or who appear to have an eating disorder" but instead would "work with models who, in our view, are healthy and help to promote a healthy body image".
Unfortunately since June 2012, the Vogue Health Initiative has been broken three times, with Vogue Mexico, Vogue China and Vogue Italia each shooting 15-year olds and then claiming they did not know how old the model was – despite such information being freely available via Google. It is an issue Condé Nast is taking seriously, however. "Following the former instances where Vogue unknowingly featured a model who was underage, checks have been strengthened and model agencies are now required by Vogue to provide documentary proof of age," states Nicky Eaton, director of press and PR Condé Nast Britain.
Vogue is an industry leader and Sara Ziff believes its efforts have been made in "good faith" but the problem is wider than Vogue. The current campaign for fashion label Miu Miu features 15-year-old child star Elle Fanning, images which advertising-revenue dependent magazines are unlikely to reject. In 2012 Marc Jacobs mistook exploitation for verve when he deliberately flouted Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) guidelines by featuring two 14-year-old girls as catwalk models. Every time a high-profile brand shuns child protection initiatives it makes abuse easier to occur outside of the spotlight.
In such a deregulated industry – one which Ziff likens to "the Wild West" – voluntary guidelines have not proved effective. Labour laws exist to protect other industries – why should a sector whose employees are predominantly vulnerable young girls far from home be any different?
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Headon & Quarmby, the 79-year-old family-run lingerie manufacturer behind Mary Portas's Kinky Knickers lingerie range, has called in administrators.
Portas reopened the sewing room at the factory in Middleton, Greater Manchester, when she launched her lingerie range as part of the Channel 4 series Mary's Bottom Line, which was a high-profile attempt to focus on how the UK manufacturing industry could be revived. But the jobs of the company's 33 staff are now at risk after administrators from the accountancy firm BDO were appointed earlier this week.
Despite several reports that the range was selling well in stores such as House of Fraser, the joint administrator Kerry Bailey said a drop in post-Christmas orders had hit the business. She said: "We are doing everything we can to try to secure a future for the business, and we are hopeful of securing a sale."
Mary Portas, who said she didn't have any financial involvement in the business, said she was "really upset" to hear about the factory's financial troubles because its initial success had helped get the fashion industry talking about bringing manufacturing back to the UK.
"We are ringing around seeing how we can support them," she said. "I think there's a future for the business and so do they."
She added: "You need to fight for stuff and try and make change. This was a very important thing we did for British manufacturing, and if the media keep knocking things when slips happen, they we will never make change and that's real change."
Eight apprentices were taken on during the Bottom Line show, paid for by the TV production company Endemol for the first nine months. The company later doubled its workforce in a bid to keep up with demand. It had recently revealed plans to launch its own sleepwear and lingerie range – Ella&Me – and had planned to open its own academy to train sewing staff next to the factory.
Aldo Liguori couldn't do his job without languages. Liguori is global head of PR at Fast Retailing, the Japanese company behind international clothing giants Uniqlo and French label Comptoir des Cotonniers. He is fluent in five languages, including Japanese, which he says gives him "a complete advantage" when liaising with the media and his senior colleagues around the world.
We meet at the Uniqlo headquarters in Tokyo's tallest office building, looking out over the city of people in bright T-shirts and puffer jackets below. Aldo believes his language skills have elevated his career by giving him the flexibility and adaptability to work in many locations. He has expanded his knowledge of companies, products and media "by being able to speak their language and not assuming that everybody's going to be speaking mine".
Although English is widely spoken in the fashion industry, foreign language skills are becoming increasingly important for those aiming for the top of this highly globalised trade. The UK's second and third favourite high street shops, Zara and H&M, are based overseas, while New Look, currently at number one, recently announced plans to expand its presence in Europe and enter the Chinese market for the first time.
International brands like Uniqlo look for language skills when recruiting. Total fluency is not always necessary: the company offers language training for employees who need to improve and Aldo advises against pretending you know it all. "If you are not able to fully understand what someone is asking or telling you, take a step back and ask them to repeat. Even though I started many years ago, that has been a true success factor for me".
Language study may not be à la mode, yet the British Fashion Council has highlighted the power of languages to extend the worldwide reach of UK-based designers and brands. In its latest report, they want to improve the British fashion industry's world standing by focusing more on languages.
Kat Shallcross thinks her degree in French and Spanish helped her land the position of marketing administrator for New Look, checking stock levels in their European stores. "It would definitely have been difficult to have done the job without my language skills. To be able to speak in French rather than just English made everything more efficient."
Her languages proved essential when she had to give a nerve-wracking but successful French presentation at a European team conference, and on visits to Paris and Belgium where "the store managers couldn't have explained everything in English that they explained to me in French".
Foreign travel is one aspect that makes the fashion industry appear glamorous to outsiders. However, you won't get as far speaking only English on these trips, says Patrick Clark, another languages graduate and online editor for glossy magazine Schön! When we speak he is about to leave for Milan to report on Fashion Week, where networking outside shows is a vital part of the job.
"Anyone you meet at Fashion Week is potentially a colleague. I've created a lot of links in Milan with people by speaking Italian – a photographer we're working with now is a friend of a friend." Press releases translated into English often have mistakes, so he always reads them in Italian to get a better feel for the label's image.
Native Russian speaker Jana Reynolds works as the international development manager at the exclusive N°10_Showroom in Paris, where her mother tongue is invaluable: "If I did not speak Russian 98% of my Russian clients would not be my clients."
Yet she has found that speaking fluent French and Italian, as well as English, has been useful when building her international career. "If you speak French or Italian, or you're a designer showing in France or Italy, you show you belong. Fashion is an industry that survives on symbolic value so heavily."
Just after we speak, she emails to let me know she has just sealed a large deal at a trade show with an elderly Italian customer who owns multiple stores in Udine and speaks zero English, which "would have been a massive opportunity missed if I couldn't communicate".
The more languages, the better, it would seem, but which to learn? "Most of the trade happens in France and Italy, but the real money is not in Europe – the buyers are from China and Japan," says Jana. Patrick agrees, noting that many people working in Milan showrooms speak Russian and Chinese to attract high spenders from the East.
This trend has been picked up by Asos, which launched its Chinese site in November, and Topshop, which will soon open its first stores in the country. "There are plenty of times when English isn't enough for work," says Timothy Parent, founder of China Fashion Collective. "Many of the designers I work with only speak Chinese. Building relationships and meeting people are incredibly important, and in China you are extremely limited if you don't speak the language."
Despite the allure of the foreign catwalk, there are currently no joint undergraduate fashion and language courses available in the country. This means students interested in developing their international prospects must arrange to study a language in addition to their main degree, sometimes at an extra cost. Some institutions, such as the University of the Creative Arts, offer no form of language provision whatsoever.
This may be due to the demanding nature of practical degrees, says Jason Clapperton, head of careers and student recruitment at London College of Fashion. He does stress that all the college's courses emphasise the global aspect of the industry. "If you set up your own label, you're going to have to know how to deal with people in the industry, and they may be from a whole variety of different countries."
London College of Fashion students are encouraged to make use of the university language centre and Erasmus links to study textiles in Lyon or design in Denmark. His colleague Emilie Gautier is keen to point out that learning a new language and going abroad is a form of creative and cultural exchange, which can influence a designer's visual, as well as verbal, communication skills.
Nottingham Trent University claims that languages are "definitely beneficial" for all their fashion students, yet among those from the UK, only around one in 10 choose to study a language on top of their course. This suggests that by making an effort to acquire a different vocabulary, students hoping to work in the industry will indeed stand out from the crowd.
Being multilingual can help you make the best of opportunities in the competitive fashion world. Although English remains the industry's current lingua franca, the flexibility gained by learning another language can take your career to the top. As Jana puts it: "you can get by with English, but it's more about the quality of communication. Fashion people are very irrational, emotional, neurotic people, and the safer they feel in your company, the further you're going to get with them."
A new wave of "silver surfer" older shoppers helped drive a strong Christmas for the N Brown home shopping group.
The owner of online lingerie store Figleaves and plus-size brand Simply Be said underlying sales rose 5.1% in the 19 weeks to 11 January as its House of Bath brand, aimed at the over-70s, enjoyed a 30% rise in sales.
"Our whole mature portfolio of brands is really seeing increased browsing and propensity to shop online from tablet computers," said chief executive Angela Spindler. "Older customers are now prepared to place an order using a tablet, which they typically weren't on a mobile phone. It's a real driver to online growth in that market," she said.
In all 45% of N Brown's online sales came from mobile devices including smartphones and tablet computers. More than half of the group's sales now come from the internet as shoppers switch from traditional catalogues.
Spindler, meanwhile is leading the expansion of N Brown's high street presence with plans to reach 25 outlets, up from seven at present.
N Brown also benefited from shoppers' increasing confidence in online retailer's ability to deliver close to Christmas and strong sales of party dresses and novelty Christmas jumpers. The retailer sold more than 2m Christmas-themed sweaters. Profit margins slipped slightly as N Brown was forced to compete with discounting across the high street but the retailer said it still expected to meet profit forecasts.
Online fashion retailer Asos has unveiled strong Christmas trading figures, underlining shoppers' rapid move to the internet when it comes to buying clothes.
Total retail sales jumped 38% to £335.7m in the four months to the end of December – ahead of market forecasts for a 36% rise. Sales in the UK, Asos's biggest market, increased 37% to 133.7m.
Nick Robertson, Asos's chief executive, said: "We have enjoyed another strong Christmas and made a good start to the financial year. Retail sales in the UK were particularly strong.
"We have been benefiting from a structural shift online for 10 years. By constantly improving the offer to our fashion-conscious twentysomething customers they are rewarding us with more sales."
He said improvements included allowing customers to pick up their purchases from 3,000 convenience stores across the country to meet increasing demand for "click and collect" orders.
Asos's busiest day was Monday 2 December, with core customers using their pay cheques to buy dresses and other items to wear themselves over the Christmas rather than on presents for others.
Asos targets young shoppers keen to emulate the styles of celebrities such as Kate Moss and Cara Delevingne. David Cameron's fortysomething wife, Samantha, wore a £42 Asos dress to watch the prime minister's conference speech in October.
The company's success, even in the UK where consumer spending power has suffered a relentless squeeze, highlights the importance of the internet to retailers. Companies with strong online operations, such as Next and John Lewis, withstood tough Christmas trading conditions while those with a weaker online operation, including Debenhams and Morrisons, suffered.
Numis analyst Andrew Wade said: "This [performance] was achieved despite a competitive backdrop. We continue to believe that Asos is a unique global proposition, a profitable fast fashion pure play squarely targeting its twentysomething market, with a vast growth opportunity.
Asos's international sales rose 38% to £202m. The company delivers to 237 countries and territories and sells more than 65,000 products bearing famous fashion names as well as its own brand.
Asos opened a standalone website in China in November to serve the world's second-biggest economy and has 7.9 million active users worldwide, up 41% from a year ago. It is investing heavily in its international operations this year, including in China and the US.
Asos shares were down 5.9% at 6,457p in late morning trading after almost tripling in value last year.
Vive la brindille! As Britain's most fashionable model prepares to celebrate her 40th birthday, the French are joining in the birthday celebrations of the girl they call "the twig".
Kate Moss, who has appeared on many a Gallic catwalk during a career that has spanned more than two decades, is the star of an "unauthorised" documentary that aims to explore the secret of her professional longevity.
Dominique Miceli, director of Looking for Kate, which is to be screened in France on Sunday, on the channel Paris Première, says she has long been fascinated by the supermodel.
"I wanted to know what the secret is. Why she inspires so many people, why she's a photographer's dream," Miceli told the Observer.
"She's not very tall, she's not a conventional beauty, but she is capable of inspiring artists. And after all these years she's still cool, she still has contracts and work, and she's still there in the top advertising campaigns."
The British Moss machine, however, closed ranks on the French director. Miceli sent a handwritten letter to Moss, who will turn 40 on16 January, but had no reply. She sent 65 requests for interviews to friends, colleagues and people who have worked with Moss, and had only 15 positive responses – and three of those cancelled at the last moment.
Friends and confidants of the supermodel have been similarly circumspect about this week's birthday celebrations, although Moss does have form when it comes to marking such occasions.
Her 21st was held at a notorious Los Angeles nightspot, the Viper Rooms, and was organised by her then boyfriend, Johnny Depp. Guests included Michael Hutchence and Jason Donovan – who later admitted passing out on the dance floor after taking too much cocaine.
At her 30th, held at Claridge's in London, guests dressed up as characters from F Scott Fitzgerald's The Beautiful and the Damned, while for her 34th she had planned to party for 34 hours – but only lasted 18.
The documentary does at least include interviews with photographer Peter Lindbergh, French fashion designer Isabel Marant, Brice Compagnon, the casting director at Elle magazine, and British film director Mike Figgis, who filmed Moss in a series of Agent Provocateur adverts and for an exhibition called Kate and Other Women.
"To find out what's hiding behind the mask of the world's best-known women, you have to dig … with all the problems that brings: the silence of her friends, the threats from those close to her and a host of other such kindnesses … but perhaps that's the real secret of her success: the mystery. The whole world knows her without really knowing her," says the introduction to the film.
"As everyone knows there is maximum control of her image by her agent [Sarah Dukas], but this was something else," said Miceli.
"People warned me to be careful because, they said, she had a horde of lawyers, but my lawyer was fine about it all. I wanted to do something positive, but there were interviews blocked and called off at the last minute, and people told not to speak to me."
Even so, Miceli remains a fan. "I discovered by speaking to people that Kate Moss is liked because she is herself. She does what she wants and lives her life the way she wants. If she wants to smoke on the catwalk, she smokes on the catwalk. She has no limits.
"Also, she is capable of completely changing her image. A photographer knows he will not get the same image of Kate Moss today as another did yesterday or will tomorrow."
She added: "This is what made her so different from the other supermodels of the 1980s. They were superb but always looked the same, whereas every picture of Kate shows a different girl."
Miceli admits that she steered well clear of the numerous controversies that have peppered Moss's life and career, including her relationships with Depp and singer Pete Doherty, but did "very briefly" touch on the cocaine scandal.
Miceli says she did this "only because everyone said her career was finished after that, and in fact it made her even more successful. I didn't want to dig into the more touchy aspects. It wasn't my aim or my brief. It doesn't interest me."
The issue of the minimum wage is inflaming employment relations in Haiti, as garment factory owners and workers unions argue about the optimum rate amid fears the country's textile exports may become uncompetitive if the bar is set too high.
Garments constitute 90% of Haiti's exports, earning $800m (£485) a year, the biggest source of foreign exchange after diaspora remittances. The sector employs 31,000 people, a significant if small contribution to the organised jobs market in a poor, predominantly young workforce beset by unemployment rates of more than 40%.
Ironically, the dispute was triggered by attempts to formally raise the minimum wage.
On 10 December, a few hundred people took to the streets of the Haitian capital, Port au Prince, in protest against a scheduled increase in the minimum wage on 1 January. It might have been another demonstration against President Michel Martelly's government, except for what came next. Furious at the marginal pay rise – from 200 to 225 Haitian gourdes (£2.76 to £3.11) for an eight-hour day – some protesters vandalised garment factories in the main industrial park, prompting the owners to close them to close for a few days on the grounds of security concerns. The private sector's Association des Industries d'Haiti (ADIH) warned the closure and an increased reputation of instability risked grave damage to the garment sector.
The 12% increase in minimum wage was recommended by the Conseil Superieur des Salaires, Haiti's high wage council, a recently constituted body mandated by law and comprising the government, private sector and trades unions.
But the increase is considered derisory by the more militant and vocal of Haiti's 17 textile sector unions. Yannick Etienne, of Batay Ouvriye, the workers' rights organisation, described it as a "miserable" wage. Some of the unions are asking for a 150% increase to 500 gourdes per day.
The demand has been dismissed as absurd and irresponsible by factory owners, government officials, Haitian economists and foreign observers. Haiti's minimum wage, they say, is already four times that of textile workers in Bangladesh.
In an attempt to explain their opposition to too high a minimum wage, garment factory owners recently wrote an open letter exhorting workers to "keep Haiti competitive" in the race against "big rivals" – Bangladesh, Cambodia and Vietnam.
Martelly's administration uses the slogan "Ayiti pare pou biznis" (Haiti ready for business) to push Haiti's readiness to trade but activists deride it as a race to the bottom.
The apparel industry says it is a struggle to sell Haiti as a garment hub because energy costs are high and workers less skilled and productive compared with rival locations in Asia.
"I'm amazed we still have a garment industry at all in Haiti. We are already so much less competitive than other countries," said a businessman speaking on condition of anonymity.
Haiti's enviable advantage lies in a unique US gift called the Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement (Hope) Act (pdf), which was signed into law in 2008 and provides duty-free apparel and textiles products quotas.
The duty-free quota is generous. In the year starting 20 December 2012, Haiti was allowed to export 306,742,329 sq metres equivalent (SME) to the US regardless of the fabric's origin, so long as 50% of the garment was assembled in Haiti. From 20 December 2013, the annual duty-free quota rose to 322,629,971 SME.
But Haiti found it hard even to meet last year's quota, exporting just 259m SME to the US up to October. Critics say this comes down to Haiti's inability to rise to the challenge of scoring an open goal.
Henri-Claude Müller-Poitevien, of the Haitian presidential commission to implement the Hope Act, says time is running out for Haiti, as is the act, which expires in September 2020. Haiti needs "to improve pricing and provide quality – [such as] embellishments, embroidery and accessories because Bangladeshi labour is cheaper than Haitian," he warned.
But there are no easy answers. The cost of living is high in Haiti with the consumer price index increasing 124% in the past decade, according to economists. Yet the minimum wage has barely gone up three-fold in the same period. According to some estimates, the typical Haitian family spends half its budget on food, but this is a great deal more expensive now than in 2003.
To that extent, it may be compassionate common sense to align basic pay with a living wage. But that would mean fewer orders, even for the low end of the apparel sector, such as T-shirts. Some observers say it may be better to lower the cost of living rather than raise the minimum wage unsustainably. But they know this may be easier said than done.
The idea for Handprint came from a quote by Ali Hewson: "We carry the stories of the people who make our clothes". It was something Livia Firth, creative director of Eco Age, mentioned when she asked myself and Zoe Franklin to make a film that highlighted the people who make our clothes. We imagined how many people's hands must touch our clothes before we wear them, and that if we could see or speak to those garment workers directly we might think about them and our clothes quite differently.
We asked model and sustainability champion Elettra Wiedemann to be our lead performer. Casting director Sophie North cast actors who hailed from all over the world to play the garment workers. I was amazed that so much international talent could be found in London in a week.
Ryan Chappell, our choreographer, spent a day with us in the back of a church rehearsing the actors with a camera and contemporary dancer Georgiana Cavendish as the stand-in for Elettra. We wanted only the actors' hands to be visible in the frame around Elettra. It was exciting to see the images we'd only imagined coming to life.
You never really know what you've got on the day of a shoot, or if the film is OK. We had one day to shoot a complicated series of extended takes. Luckily, things went to plan. But when we shot the exchange of looks between Elettra and the garment workers, it seemed a quiet dignity was conveyed, which is what we'd hoped for. We wanted to take what was out of sight and bring it into focus. Garment workers worldwide take pride in their work, and that deserves to be properly recognised and reimbursed by their employers, and anyone buying their clothes.
At the 25th anniversary of Nike's iconic Air Max trainer at the Pompidou centre in Paris, the partygoers shuffle around trying not to bump into each other as they eye up one another's shoes, taking close up photographs. Every little detail matters to the fanatical sneakerheads. They know if someone is into shoes by the way they lace.
Earlier that day a a select group of these trainer obsessives made the pilgrimage to Nike's Parisian headquarters. The building is like a hall of fame for trainers: brightly-coloured white shoes lit up with lime green, blue or yellow swooshes are displayed in glossy cabinets. The sneakerheads are here to meet Tinker Hatfield, designer of some of the brand's best-known shoes, including the Air Max One and the Air Jordan range. Carrying their own Nikes, the sneakerheads queue up to get them signed in almost ritualistic reverence.
Hatfield, 61, dresses as brightly as some of his trainers, pairing a yellow T-shirt with neon orange trainers. Now Nike's vice president of design and special projects, he says it was initially a struggle to get his ideas heard.
"The Air Max was revolutionary in its time," he says. "It had new colours and it was wearable and yet wasn't too crazy – it caught on for a lot of those reasons. The shoe was designed to breathe, be flexible and fit well but the fact it had the air window in the sole and the frame colour around it meant it looked a lot different than other shoes in its day. It was easy to recolour it and do it over and over again, it wasn't overdesigned. A lot of people were trying to get me fired for doing that at Nike. I'm kind of proud I'm named after someone who breaks the rules a little bit here and there. I'm a Tinker."
Hatfield has a devout following. For those sneakerheads, the trainer is not just leather and rubber, or synthetic, suede and rubber, it also reflects the story and subcultures that inspired the design.
"Every shoe I design has to have a story behind it," says Hatfield. "That's what everybody falls for – be it the history of the shoe, the cultural relevance, or the technology, whether that's being excited about the latest technology of the latest design like flywire or reminiscing about the technology of the Air Max for example."
Hatfiled admits being surprised that his Air Max and Air Jordan designs had such crossover appeal, particularly among the hip-hop scene.
"Dance music I can understand a little bit more – it's about movement – but for it to jump the fence and go into modern hip hop culture – I was surprised, happily surprised," he says.
Nike's popularity in the music scene and across popular culture continues to soar. On his world tour next year, Justin Timberlake will be wearing a modified Air Jordan designed by Hatfield to dance around on stage. Other famous collectors include Jerry Seinfield, Robin Williams and DJ Clark Kent.
At the same time, there is a growing market in secondhand Nikes. Earlier this year, Crepe City sneakers festival in London, had queues around the block while the 6ACRE Kicks sneakers convention in Manchester had queues that stretched along entire roads.
Despite owning "300-400 pairs" Hatfield would not describe himself as a sneakerhead, admitting his trainers are "not all in one place, they are thrown about the house – some are in the attic".
The son of a basketball coach, Hatfield was a pole vault champion and athlete, playing for the state in not only basketball but also American football. He won a scholarship to study architecture at the University of Oregon (Nike co-founder Bill Bowerman was there at the same time) and in 1981 was hired by Nike as a "corporate architect", where he spent his first four years designing shops and offices.
"I was designing some very unique buildings and offices and things at the time and people were like that guy should be doing shoes. I wasn't pushing for it but, quite frankly, I knew it was inevitable and when it finally happened I was like yeah, let's roll," he says. "Even as a young architect I was always the lead architect, even at the beginning I always had the creative process down and packed."
Twenty-five years on, Hatfield remains as passionate about his designs. He talks excitedly about achieving "supremacy" over chief rivals Adidas and being the "best in the world".
But Hatfield admits that Nike has made mistakes. The brand's image was tarnished by revelations that it used sweatshop labour. Hatfield says that period marked a creative lowpoint but he claims that moment has long gone.
Despite repeated attempts to poach him, Hatfield says has no desire to hang up his Nikes.
"I have been offered jobs by everybody for a lot more money – I've never been interested because I see Phil Knight as a great guy. He protected some of my early ideas and the process and I'm very loyal to him and to Nike for allowing me to do what I'm doing. I'm not going anywhere."
It's an American import popularised by Hollywood 'A' listers on the red carpet and offering a mind-boggling choice of silhouette-smoothing slips, knee-length "britches" and even full-length leggings to suck in bulging tummies and over-generous thighs.
Now UK retailers say sales of body-shaping underwear or "shapewear" have soared in the run-up to Christmas as women (the men's market is tiny) try to look their best in figure-hugging party outfits.
Department store John Lewis has reported a 150% increase in sales of the US brand Spanx alone – which promises shoppers that they've "got your butt covered".
Other retailers including Marks & Spencer, Topshop, Asda and Sainsbury's have followed suit with a range of more affordable items and are also reporting strong sales ahead of office parties and other seasonal celebrations.
Body-gripping shapewear has evolved from unflattering flesh-coloured Bridget Jones-style pants and eye-wateringly tight lycra (or spandex) to breathable girdles, waist-cinchers and strapless bodies.
Jo Hooper, head of womenswear at John Lewis, said state-of-art technology such as bonding and laser-cutting has "transformed" the product by banishing the seams, hems and bulky fastenings which have traditionally stood in the way of a streamlined silhouette. Improved fabrics also help the body to "breathe", while special shaping zones target specific problem areas.
Hooper noted that red carpet stars unwittingly revealing a tell-tale glimpse of Spanx included, most recently, actress Cate Blanchett: "Celebrities all look wonderful in it. If they can wear it, why not everyone else? Our sales figures show that loads of women do, even if they don't admit it. Shapewear is clearly becoming a mainstream item in women's wardrobes as they use it not just to give them a boost at a party or a wedding but to give them confidence at other times as well. Spanx is our best-seller and women can see that it does what it says on the box."
Spanx was founded in 2000 by American entrepreneur and now billionaire Sara Blakely, who launched the range after struggling to find the right underwear to wear under a pair of pale trousers. She cut the feet off a pair of tights and caused a commercial revolution in the lingerie world.
The Spanx range set tills ringing in the USA following the personal endorsement of Oprah Winfrey, since then the fashion for tight-fit 'body-con' dresses on both sides of the Atlantic has made shapewear – with many copycat brands – a universally popular trend.
High Street and online retailer Debenhams has seen a 10% increase in shapewear sales on the same time last year and a near doubling of sales between October and November this year in the run-up to the festive season.
And at Marks & Spencer – which sells 120 own-brand items of shapewear in its lingerie department – sales have increased by 75% in December
Soozie Jenkinson, M&S's head of lingerie design, said: "In the three weeks before Christmas, we expect to sell an amazing 10 shapewear items per minute as women prepare for the party season"
Angora is a luxury fibre produced by long-haired Angora rabbits. Once a thriving worldwide industry, its production and spinning is now concentrated in China. Some 4,700 tons are produced each year according to the International Wool Textile Organization, 90% of this in China, a country with nothing in the way of legislation to protect farmed animals.
From farms to spinning mills, the growing domination of cheap Chinese angora production has all but wiped out the UK industry. Tess O'Connor kept angora rabbits for over 40 years, but describes how many breeders are stopping because of feed costs and cheap imports.
In the UK's specialised cottage industry, rabbits generally have their fur clipped with scissors every three months and extra fibre is combed out inbetween. They usually produce less than 1lb of fur each year but for owners like O'Connor, the rabbit's welfare took priority and "if they didn't produce enough it didn't matter".
In the fashion industry a rabbit is a commodity and the focus for farms and retailers is keeping production costs low and to maximise profits. High demand for cheap fibre coupled with a lack of legislation governing how it can be produced has appalling consequences for the 50m angora rabbits industrially farmed across China.
Footage shot secretly (warning: graphic content) by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) shows live rabbits tied by their front and back paws being plucked raw. Hair is ripped from their bodies to ensure fibres are as long and heavy as possible - the pain and shock of which causes the rabbits to scream. The rabbits are put back into cramped wire cages to grow their hair back ready for plucking again. After three years the rabbits have their throats cut.
The fashion industry ensures that a glamorous facade hides this grim reality. In 2012 H&M released a sumptuous David Lynch-esque advert starring Lana Del Rey singing Blue Velvet while stroking her pale pink 70% angora sweater.
The outcry over the PETA footage has led several high profile brands to suspend production of angora products. H&M, Espirit, C&A and New Look are among those who have halted production. This is not a permanent situation nor an admission that brands have done anything wrong by buying up cheap industrially produced angora. Under its product policy, H&M states it only accepts products made of angora rabbit hair from farms with good animal husbandry, and that plucking is not acceptable.
Kathy Guillermo, senior vice president of PETA in the USA, says that PETA filmed in 10 different farms in two different provinces in China. "If we can say nearly all of the angora comes from China, and these horrible conditions that we documented are the standard for the industry, it's very likely that's where H&M and everyone else's angora is coming from." Elin Hallerby, press officer at H&M, says the company is "accelerating further inspections of our sub-suppliers to ensure compliance with our policy. We are doing extra controls now."
Before angora reaches retailers, it passes through the hands of brokers; tracing its source means tracking the fibre back through two or three stages. It's not easy, but the information is there for those who put in the time and effort. If an NGO such as PETA can accomplish this then what's stopping multi-billion pound corporations?
"I think we care about it", says Guillermo. "I don't think these companies necessarily have the same motivation that we do. If they're not going to track backwards themselves then they do need to [know] what we document."
H&M says it has a "good" relationship and is in "continuous and close dialogue" with PETA. PETA agrees but says it has no intention of helping brands shop around for angora. "Our goal isn't to help them find a more humane method because we don't think there is one," explains Guillermo.
In the UK many breeders would like to revitalise British angora so that Chinese factory farming is not the only option. Yet creating a niche infant industry of farms and mills would be an arduous process. According to James Meadway, senior economist at the New Economics Foundation, it would require "protection for the industry through import controls, subsidies for producers, and most importantly access to cheap credit for those looking to set up and run businesses". This kind of reindustrialisation is unlikely, primarily because "total and complete opposition to anything like this has been a watchword of UK governments for 30 years".
Harvesting angora without harming rabbits is a slow labour of love incompatible with industrial capitalism. In this sense it should be a scarce fabric, rather than something cheaply produced. Britain does at least have animal rights legislation, yet there is no reason to believe that if mass production shifted here it would be cruelty free.
"The cruelty is imposed by profit, not some innate Chinese characteristic," states Meadway. "Once you start believing that everything can be reduced to a commodity and turned into a source of profit, you remove any duty of care."
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
The elegant woman from the world-famous jewellers looked momentarily puzzled: "The Halo diadem? … Ah, you mean Kate's tiara."
She led the way through the Salon d'Honneur at the Grand Palais in Paris to a velvet-lined display case containing a platinum and diamond tiara fit for a princess.
To ensure its significance did not go unremarked, there was a framed photograph of Kate, Duchess of Cambridge, wearing the Halo diadem – "something borrowed" from the Queen – at her wedding to Prince William in 2011.
Visitors gathered around the tiara – made in 1936 for Princess Elizabeth, later the Queen Mother, and relatively understated for a diamond-encrusted headband designed for royal use. "It's quite simple, quite modest," one noted with surprise.
In its current company at a new show, Cartier: the Style and the History, which opens in Paris on Wednesday, "Kate's tiara" might well appear a model of restraint.
The display spans more than a century from the French maison's birth in 1847, via its description by Edward VII as "the jeweller of kings, and the king of jewellers", up until the 1970s. It is a social and artistic statement of the times.
Undaunted by wars, economic depression and upheaval, the exhibition reveals that when the going gets tough, the world's royals, heiresses, socialites, bankers' wives, celebrities and even maharajas get shopping for sparklers.
Among the exhibits is a ruby necklace given to Elizabeth Taylor by her third husband, Mike Todd. A short film shows her wearing the piece and matching earrings at a swimming pool in St-Jean-Cap-Ferrat on the French Riviera in 1957.
A hand-drawn design for a necklace incorporating the historic La Peregrina pearl, given to Taylor by Richard Burton, is also on display, alongside a handful of elegant jewels commissioned for Princess Grace of Monaco.
There is also the 23.6ct Williamson diamond, considered to be the finest pink diamond ever found, set in a flower brooch on loan from Queen Elizabeth II.
Even that, however, pales in comparison with the sheer ostentation of jewels commissioned by the would-be royal Wallis Simpson, Duchess of Windsor.
True to her mantra that "if you can afford it then there's no pleasure buying it", Simpson – exiled to Paris with little apparent source of income – set about making what the curators describe as "particularly extravagant orders": a three-dimensional diamond-encrusted panther atop a perfectly round sapphire larger than a hazelnut; a glittering, multi-gem flamingo brooch; a necklace sporting diamonds, turquoise and 27 amethysts including one cut in the form of a heart and a gold perfume spray.
The exhibition, which features 600 jewels as well as sketches, paintings and clothes – the majority from Cartier's own archives – has raised questions over its blurred distinction between history and state-sponsored advertising.
The joint curator Laure Dalon, employed by the French national museums authority, said Cartier had approached the Grand Palais to suggest organising the exhibition, which she insisted is of genuine cultural and historic interest.
"Cartier is one of France's iconic companies and is a part of France's tradition and heritage. Of course, it would be naive of me to deny that it is very good publicity for the company, but we've done this very seriously.
"It's a new subject for us, but we have approached it as a history of art, in this case jewellery. The exhibition has been independently curated and the company did not interfere at all."
She added: "We also stopped at 1970 to make a clear boundary between the historical aspect and the contemporary company. This exhibition has nothing to do with what Cartier is doing today."
Asked to put a value on the collection, Dalon shook her head.
"Impossible to say. It's not just the actual monetary value of the pieces but their social history, their owners and their place in the history of decorative arts." She added: "That makes them priceless, really."
A phlegmatic character can belie a multitude of feelings, making it difficult for others to pick up on emotional cues. But help is at hand. The GER mood sweater, by design lab Sensoree, is wearable tech that attempts to shed light on the inner feelings of the wearer, without the need for uncomfortable chat.
According to Sensoree, the top makes use of Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) – the way in which the conductance of human skin changes in response to stimuli. When you are calm and at rest, skin GSR is lower than when you are anxious. While GSR has previously been exploited in lie-detectors, Sensoree has harnessed it to turn a funnel-shaped LED collar a range of colours. These are designed to indicate different levels of arousal that the firm has extrapolated to different emotional states ranging from "tranquil – Zen" (green) to "nirvana – ecstatic, blissful" (yellow). Sensoree says the technology works by attaching sensors to the wearer's hands that are then hooked up to the collar creating what it calls a Galvanic Extimacy Responder. But beware, the mood sweater will turn you red-faced if you meet the love of your life – it should glow crimson when you are "nervous – in love".
Having featured in shows and exhibitions around the world, including the Digital Fall 2013 Fashion Show in San Francisco in October and the Futurotextiles exhibition in Romania last month, the mood sweater could soon be hanging in your wardrobe.
One hundred of the hi-tech custom-sized garments are expected to go on sale in March.
The Python Conservation Partnership (PCP) was launched last week by the IUCN/SSC Boa & Python Specialist Group (BPSG), the International Trade Centre (ITC) and the multi-brand group Kering (owner of Gucci, among others). The initiative aims to contribute to the conservation of two of the world's largest snakes; the Reticulated and Burmese pythons.
Over the next three years the BPSG will conduct research and analysis, and provide recommendations on sustainability, transparency, animal welfare and local livelihoods related to the python skin trade worldwide.
But why is this important? Well, let's put this trade into context. Each year, several million reptile skins are traded internationally, half a million of which are from pythons in South East Asia. The primary use of these skins is for luxury leather goods (handbags, shoes) and traditional musical instruments in China, however the meat and gall bladder is also utilised in South East Asia for traditional medicine. Combined, these uses have resulted in increased pressure on python populations.
The trade in pythons is regulated internationally by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and is consequently subjected to controls at the exporting and importing level. However, this has not been enough to guarantee trust in a growing trade, which according to a recent study by the ITC, the Trade in Southeast Asian Python Skins (PDF), involves not less than six countries of the region, hundreds of thousands of hunters and generates about $1bn per year. Despite being a significant industry in its own right, circulation of images and video from python slaughterhouses via the internet has once again thrust this trade into the spotlight.
Despite the increased attention, concerns surrounding this trade are not new. During the 1990s there were warning signs that trade in pythons could negatively impact the conservation of some species. Scientific studies were carried out, reports and recommendations were issued, but little or nothing was actually accomplished. Commitment from the industry was haphazard. Only regional associations participated in the initiative - but none of the major brands followed - and the trade went on with no visible improvements or innovations. This is where the PCP initiative aims to remedy that situation.
Today we know that in spite of the benefits represented by python trade to local communities, there are serious deficiencies in the commercial chain and sourcing, which results in lack of transparency and favours illegal activity. The lack of transparency and the illegal nature of at least part of the trade hinder proper management of pythons at the local level, favour unfair benefit-sharing among stakeholders, and impede the application of better standards for animal handling.
Furthermore, an increasing proportion of python skins in trade are being declared as originating from breeding facilities. However serious reservations have been expressed about the economic and biological viability of these operations. Even though this is not necessarily a matter of survival for South East Asian pythons, which have been exploited for at least eight decades, the current system of utilisation endangers the sustainability of the activity as a whole, and with it the livelihoods of the people who cohabit with them.
The PCP will contribute to addressing these issues with several projects concerning wild harvest, captive breeding, animal health and welfare, and the impact on livelihoods. Over the next 18 months we expect to publish a series of reports that will highlight the findings and recommendations.
Over the next month we will be finalising the first report on the feasibility of captive rearing of pythons. By the end of the first year we propose to have a third report on the livelihood impacts that the python has for local people in South East Asia and a management protocol for ensuring sustainable wild harvests. These documents will provide the data and recommendations for CITES, government authorities and the private sector to begin creating systems for improved monitoring of the trade in terms of sustainability, traceability and animal welfare.
The BPSG faces the challenge of coping with conservation problems for nearly 200 species worldwide. Even though this initiative relates to fewer than 3% of the species within our remit, the approach is innovative and the hope is it will pave the road toward a new paradigm for conservation.
Until now, collaboration by scientists, specialists in international trade and major industry stakeholders to improve wildlife trade has not been accomplished. This is an exciting initiative for all stakeholders and for python conservation. Watch this space!
Tomás Waller is chair of the Boa & Python Specialist Group (BPSG) and a member of International Union for Conservation of Nature's (IUCN) Species Survival Commission (SSC)
Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a member of the Guardian Sustainable Business Network to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Followers of fashion will be familiar with the difficulties of creating an individual sense of style selected from off-the-rack collections. For those determined to stay one step ahead of the trend, live garment printing could offer a solution. All-over printing pioneer Yr (pronounced "your") is currently running pop-ups in Liberty of London and Topman's flagship Oxford Street store, using dye-sublimation techniques to create eye-popping designs in less time than it takes to wade your way through the hordes of Christmas shoppers at Oxford Circus station.
Yr is not your average T-shirt printing service – we're not talking over-sized neon tops emblazoned with "Ibiza '09". Large touch-screen devices invite you to swipe your way through a huge choice of print patterns, as well a wild array of smaller individual images to layer on top. It's simple to browse the myriad options available although, as I soon discover, rather time-consuming.
The technology that characterises Yr's innovative approach to garment printing is likely to appeal to the Instagram generation – you can select filters and Photoshop-style effects to customise your chosen design. Manipulating the scale of the print and making minute alterations to the colour hues ensure that it's virtually impossible for two designs to be exactly alike. After much dithering, I eventually settle on a leafy background print, accessorised with tiled floral bouquet and pine cone images, then worry that I've just designed myself a high-end Hawaiian shirt and quickly douse the whole thing in a filter named "Film" for what I hope is a "vintage" effect.
That said, the instore printing time of around 10 minutes means that this is still relatively fast fashion, albeit a version that sidesteps many of the drawbacks associated with mass production. The dye-sublimation process prints a reverse image of the design onto transfer paper then, using a heat press, converts the dye into a gas that permeates polyester fabrics. The result is a textile print of almost photographic quality, being both more detailed than screen prints and more tasteful than simple iron-on transfers, which have a tendency to fade and flake respectively.
"It's a really exciting way forward for design," says Susan Postlethwaite, director of the MA course in Fashion Futures at the London College of Fashion, "because it means that people can produce things that they really want."
Taking the element of risk away from the professionals does, of course, mean that the onus lies squarely on you, the wearer. Adorning swirled galaxy prints with hula-dancers and tiger emblems (all available options, by the way, and ones that I briefly considered) might seem like a daring display of couture confidence during the design process – it's easy to get swept up by the thrill of creative control – but I can't imagine that many shoppers will be especially keen to expand their unworn novelty T-shirt collection.
At Yr Liberty, part of the allure lies in the chance to access the department store's digital archives, allowing you to incorporate prints from designers such as William Morris into your own personalised apparel. "You can't really go wrong with [the store's existing] designs because they're so powerful, and that's really important," says Postlethwaite, "because people do need to be guided". I certainly take some comfort in the fact that my finished print is not entirely a product of my own creative credentials, of which there are few.
While the original textile designers may not have envisaged their esteemed creations covered in some of the pop-art-style flamingos and ice-cream icons which reside within Yr's own catalogue, it certainly has the potential to spark an interest among "people on the peripheries of fashion design who have very strong aesthetic ideas", Postlethwaite points out. Plus, with the festive season upon us, it's a good way to guarantee you won't be wearing the same outfit as fellow party-goers this Christmas.
It's as dated as the shoulder pad, as reviled as the leg warmer, and had collectively been thrown out or lost by most of the population by the mid-1990s. But now, to the distress of some fashion purists, the scrunchie is back.
On recent catwalks Vivienne Westwood, Missoni, Louis Vuitton and others had wound scrunchies – a cross between a frilly antimacassar and a pair of nylon tights – around the ponytails of dozens of models as part of a revival that includes neons and grunge. Fictional style icon Carrie from Sex and the City famously declared that "no woman … would be caught dead at a hip downtown restaurant wearing a scrunchie".
Now Marc Jacobs, known for his cool streetwear, has put his fashion credentials on the line by introducing scrunchies at around £25 a pop. Some might say that's quite a lot for a bit of elastic covered with fabric, but a knitted version at Missoni is selling for £55, while Topshop and American Apparel are selling them by the armful from just £4. Socialites, including model Cara Delevingne and Prince Harry's girlfriend Cressida Bonas, are rarely seen without one, and they've been spotted on actresses Sienna Miller, Jennifer Aniston, Catherine Zeta-Jones and Kate Beckinsale.
Tina Outen, a stylist used by Vogue, thinks scrunchies are a good look. "They represented attitude, which feels like what young London is all about at the moment," she said. "I'd have fun with them: layering a few brights hides a multitude of sins if you haven't got that ponytail perfect, and they can add instant volume."
Madonna has a giant one, and when Hillary Clinton wore one an official congratulated her on her speech but added: "Some of us are looking to ban the scrunchies."
Some blame its return on the London 2012 Olympics, when many athletes wore scrunchies co-ordinated with their leotards. But one woman's tousled chignon is another's messy ponytail. Glossy fashion magazine Harper's Bazaar took a stand last month when it listed five reasons to hate the scrunchie and called it an unsophisticated accessory that belonged in the past and "one fad that Bazaar fashion team will be ignoring".
This view is shared by Leillah Sekalala, who struggled to find a hairdresser after moving to the UK from Uganda in 2004. She started a website where people could recommend hairdressers for Afro hair and called it NoScrunchie.com. "We always say that no one should walk out of a salon so unhappy with her hair that she puts a scrunchie on. I remember watching that episode of Sex and the City when Carrie attacks the scrunchie, and I quietly slid the scrunchie out of my own hair and hid it behind the couch."
But it has its supporters. It was patented in 1986 by an Italian-American woman from Florida, Rommy Revson, who called it the "scunci" after her pet poodle. But a Vancouver woman, Jane Reid, is said to have had some on show at a hair accessories fair in the late 1970s.
Luke Hersheson, of upmarket salon chain Daniel Hersheson, said: "The scrunchie is super 1980s and slightly trashy, and bordered on the naff in the early 1990s, but the long ones with wire and velvet that you can make bows out of are great."
Hairdresser Charlie Le Mindu, who counts Lady Gaga among his fans, agreed: "I like the scrunchie look, but it's better for older women, or underground drag queens. I like them if there are lots of them, used to create modern forms, not just something to tie your hair back."
Too many young people are still doing real jobs for no money, as unpaid interns. But not for much longer. Around the world, young workers expected to toil for months at a time for little or no pay are battling to be rewarded fairly.
For those of us who have been campaigning on this issue for years, it's an exciting time. Former interns who are brave – and angry – enough to challenge their employers are "lawyering up" (often finding a kindly donor to cover the fees). This is a big deal. In many cases, lone twentysomethings are squaring up to huge international firms or high-profile people with deep pockets and legal teams. In the US, intern power has seen Fox Searchlight appealing against a ruling that found that it should have paid interns in its movie, Black Swan. Meanwhile, Condé Nast has ditched its unpaid internship programme, also following lawsuits.
In the UK, Tony Blair agreed to pay all his interns after public pressure and a threatened investigation. X Factor, Arcadia, IPC Media and Sony offered back pay where former interns could prove they'd worked for less than the minimum wage. This is David and Goliath stuff, especially when so many interns are keeping quiet, willing to allow themselves to be exploited in order to get on to the first rung of the work ladder. The practice is so widespread that most people know a young person who has toiled for zero wages. Against a backdrop of record youth unemployment and graduate debt, the moral case is even starker.
Part of the problem is that in many companies an intern's role (indeed, the point of them even being there) is unclear to everybody, including those tasked with supervising them. So, interns end up being given jobs simply "to keep them busy" or "to give them some experience". From here, it's easy for a "good" intern to create an entire unpaid role that wasn't there before, first for themselves and then for the next intern who replaces them when they can't afford to do it any more. Their time-poor colleagues may not even realise they aren't being paid. Or they may view unpaid internships as a rite of passage, forgetting that in their day they lasted only a few weeks, whereas today's interns toil for months or even years.
This isn't about rich kids versus poor kids (or the "sharp-elbowed middle classes", as Nick Clegg keeps insisting). The system doesn't work for anyone except penny-pinching employers who take advantage. The percentage of parents who can bankroll their children for years is tiny. The case against unpaid internships is pretty obvious: they exploit those who do them and exclude those who can't afford to. And the practice has been going on so long that the journalists I speak to often admit they nearly bankrupted themselves to get into the business.
Campaigners have found support in unexpected places. I assumed we'd need to create new laws to ban the advertisement of unpaid internships, but no. The online jobs boards – first Monster, then Milkround and the rest of the industry – volunteered to remove any ads for unpaid workers, understanding that what's good for their users is good for them.
As interns have gained confidence, employers have gone quiet. I don't read op-ed pieces from bosses defending their use of unpaid interns any more. Senior staff at advertising firms, publishing houses and PR companies would once brag to me about the trivial tasks they'd get their interns to do – including cleaning out the fridge and scooping up dog poo. They don't any more. If they still have unpaid interns, most employers keep quiet about it. But even this strategy might not wash. On 11 November, tax inspectors – who enforce minimum wage laws – announced they'd be ramping up spot checks on businesses that are known to have hired unpaid interns. And while employers can often fend off the demands of twentysomethings, when the taxman demands his cut, the tide may be turning.
Tanya de Grunwald, founder of careers blog Graduate Fog
I'm a designer, and it's not the easiest industry to get into, so at 22 I agreed to a six-month unpaid internship at a central London advertising agency. I was hoping to gain some experience, and they told me if I finished the internship and they felt I was a fit, they would keep me on and start paying me.
I arrived on my first day hoping to show them what a promising and indispensable young designer I was.
For the first two months I made tea, I brought people their dry-cleaning, I bought lunch for the office from a nearby sandwich place,  and sometimes I emptied the bins. From there, I graduated to admin tasks such as stuffing envelopes, sticking stamps on and posting them, giving out mail, making more tea. In my mind, it was all worth it for the chance of a job.
Five and a half months into the internship, I arrived at the office and found a few smartly dressed people in the foyer, about my age. As I was the still-cheerful office lackey, I brought them some water and asked what they were here for, thinking I might have to set up a meeting room. That's when I found out they were here to interview – for my internship.
That's when it hit me. My own internship was over. There was no chance of a job, and I had never been given any design work to do. They never even intended to let me know one way or the other. They let me serve water to the next wave of interns, all here on the same fake promise of a job as me. I felt stupid, sweaty and embarrassed. At the end of the day, they called me into the office and said, "So, it's over then. Cheers."
And that was it. I was unemployed again.
I was 24 and in my third year at university. We didn't have to do a placement but it helped towards a degree if you did. My university professor knew the boss at this company and set up a placement. They allocated four spaces and around 20 of us applied. My friend went for the two weeks before me, and said he'd had a fantastic mentor, talked about the projects he'd been working on, all the designing he got to do, drinking every other night with the employees. I was really excited.
When I arrived, it was my mentor's last week of work. I hardly saw him as he was tying up his last projects, but when we did spend time together he gave me some good advice. After he left, nobody was appointed to look after me. I had no desk unless someone was off sick.
One of their accounts was a crisps company, and they were rebranding a particular make. They bought a range of crisps from all over the world so they had reference packets. Everyone in the office munched through the crisps, except me. My job was to collect the empty packets and file them.
One day they gave me a digital camera and sent me to a big supermarket, to "discreetly photograph" the layout of the crisp aisle, as part of their research. The security guards caught me and I was turfed out of the shop.
During my second week I spent three days in the cutting room, with a scalpel and glue, mocking up juice and food cartons. After a long day, the knife slipped, and I stabbed the top of my finger. I rushed over to the senior in charge of the project for help. She burst out laughing and called me an idiot. Then she grabbed my hand, held it up for everyone to see, and paraded me around the office to show everyone my hilarious bleeding finger, which was now turning blue, and saying, "Typical student, can't even use a scalpel!"
When they finally realised it was serious they sent me to the receptionist, who patched me up. I left after two weeks.
I realised I'd taken a wrong turn career-wise, so at 26 I quit my job in the middle of a recession to start again. Working for a thinktank was definitely on my list of "cool careers", so when I got an internship at one that had a strong brand, I was pretty pleased. However, it was clear they were using unpaid interns to run almost the entire operation. The director made the attractive promise of a one-on-one chat to give feedback and career advice; a promise he never delivered on. The only interaction we had with him was when he would wander into the office, give his phone to one of the interns and say, "Send out a tweet".
The workload was ludicrous. When they piled on task after task, I would email back with a proposal of how to get it all done, asking for deadlines, checking I had the priorities right – but I'd get no response. I noticed a girl on my desk often looked really tired. One day she came in worse than ever; pale, dark circles under her eyes, almost shell-shocked. I was concerned, and she told me she'd emailed the boss with her finished work at midnight and had immediately been given more work to do, "so it'll be ready for tomorrow". She worked until 2am. She'd never had a job before and didn't know what was normal, but had a feeling this wasn't right.
Later, I sat down with my manager. She told me that I was seen as "difficult" for prioritising the workload, as the other interns had simply said, "No problem", and worked themselves into the ground getting it done. I told her about the girl on my desk and asked, "Is this the expectation? That we work until 2am?" She told me that not only was that the expectation, but even my habit of taking a lunch break – rather than typing and eating – was seen as poor form. The fact that we started work at 10am rather than 9am was presented as a perk.
I ended up leaving for a fantastic internship in an MP's office, but I left angry.
I interned twice for the same magazine as part of my journalism masters. The first placement was brilliant – the editor was proactive and gave me loads to do. When the digital director invited me back, I was delighted. A few days into my placement, the boss came up to me and said in a whisper, "You're quite good with technology. We've got a special task for you this afternoon, it'll probably keep you really busy."
He led me into his office, and said, "This is my daughter and she's having some issues with her dissertation. She can't get the pictures on Word to match up with the captions." He left us to it, and his daughter started giving me instructions, "This needs to go here, this other one needs to go here…" Her boyfriend was there, too, writing her bibliography. I thought I was there because I was a good journalist, and here I was with the boss's daughter – two years younger than me – telling me to "do it again".
I didn't have the guts to confront him about it; I didn't want to scupper my chances for the future. The industry is small.
I took up an unpaid internship for two weeks in the summer after seeing it advertised at the Cambridge Careers Service. As it came to 6pm on the first day, I noticed no one seemed to be saying anything about going home. I asked one of the interns what time she had left the day before and she replied, "Oh, not too late – like 10." I immediately thought, "Forget this", and went to tell the director I had rent to pay and had another job, so I couldn't stay later than 7pm or come in at weekends. To his credit, he was fine with it and quite impressed at my grafting.
Otherwise, we did not get on. The work was not what I had signed up for, which frustrated me. All I did was trawl their Facebook page to do marketing for a second world war-themed film they were making. I was therefore interacting with a bunch of nutters ranging from second world war enthusiasts to borderline racists who would throw in offensive statements that I was expected to laugh at or ignore.
As the first week came to an end, I asked when I would have my expenses reimbursed (it had clearly stated on the internship advertisement that expenses would be paid) and was sheepishly informed by his assistant that they didn't pay expenses. This meant they were expecting me to work 12-hour days, five days a week for no compensation whatsoever.
While I was there it was the weekend of the Notting Hill carnival. I heard a comment from one of my superiors, along the lines of, "What is this bank holiday? We do not have this lazy English habit in Germany," and I knew it was time to go. I left at 6pm on Thursday and sent an email over the weekend telling them that regrettably, I would not be able to complete the second week of my internship due to financial issues.
You leave university thinking, "Why wouldn't anyone hire me, with my 2:1 in Victorian literature? I'm a catch!" Before you realise you're 10-a-penny, you think landing a job at the end of a two-week placement is realistic, even likely.
My worst internship was in fashion PR. Interns work in a basement with no natural light, putting out clothes samples for editors, or sending them back to designers. I had plenty of fashion cupboard experience, but to them I was new so my first task was to untangle a massive pile of coat hangers. It was a comedy-sized knot. I remember thinking, "OK, I'm going to untangle these the best they've ever seen, to show them I can do it."
Afterwards, I came out of the fashion cupboard into the office. All the team were facing me, except for the account manager who was facing them, oblivious that I was there behind her. She was slagging me off. There had been some samples that had been put out incorrectly – which had somehow been pinned on me while I was battling the coat hangers. She said, "If he can't do it, we'll get rid of him and just get another intern." The team all looked at me, cringing, but no one could get a word in edgeways to let her know I was there. She rounded off her nasty comments, turned, and saw me. She smiled sweetly; pretended nothing had happened and walked out. No remorse.
Afterwards, I was squirrelled away to a room upstairs to photocopy reams of paper and staple them together for hours and hours. I think it was just to hide me away after that incident.
I remember thinking, "I just want to quit." But I'd already had quite a horrible manager at my last internship and thought, "No, I'm going to meet these people in life, I need to show I can be professional and just do it."
Apart from my own pride, there's always the delusion of a job at the end, to tantalise interns into weathering the worst of treatment. Also there was £20 at stake for my two weeks' work. I got my money but, unsurprisingly, not a job.
After I graduated, I was recommended to a commercial photographer by a friend, and we met, he trusted my skills and I assisted him for a few months on and off, unpaid. I respected him as I was desperate for experience, and he was happy to teach me stuff, taking me on shoots and expanding my technical knowledge.
I worked on a number of shoots unpaid, but was learning and improving so the professional relationship was building and I was the envy of my fellow photography postgraduates. After working for free for a few weeks, money became an issue. One day, he said his mum was visiting and offered me £80 to clean his house. I was so desperate for the money, I said yes. After I had cleaned his disgusting house from top to bottom, he came over and checked if I'd done a good job because his mum was "quite anal". The next day I invoiced him for the work. Although I sent several reminders, I never saw a penny or heard from him again.
I was really excited when I began a magazine internship – the job ad even stipulated "no tea-making" – and was given reams of stories to write. At 20, I got more bylines in a week than most interns get in six months. But that honeymoon phase didn't last. After a couple of weeks they started sending me on epic coffee runs – it's quite a balancing act to transport 10 skinny cappuccinos.
After a month in the office and two-dozen coffee runs, over 90% of the staff still wouldn't interact with me. One day a new "proper" member of staff was being introduced to the office, and when they got to me, "…and this is, um, someone's intern". I didn't have a name.
My boss started ordering me around by clicking her fingers. She was sitting right next to me, but would send me emails like, "Can you grab what I just sent to the printer?" The printer was about three metres from her.
They continually promised me there was "a strong chance of employment" after my six-month internship. When I found out through the grapevine the company had an "employment freeze", I hoped it was a mistake.
The worst day was when I was made responsible for sending out the newsletter (one of the biggest money-makers for the publication). There was a problem, unsurprisingly, as I was given no training. I asked my boss for help. Her exact words: "Just sort it." When it didn't run on time, I was shouted at, tutted at, and reminded of how much money I'd lost the company. The following week the task was given to a member of staff and when she encountered similar problems she was inundated with support, training and assistance. The newsletter still didn't run on time, and she was told, "Don't worry, these things happen."
I realised I was never going to be accepted as a member of the team.
They finally admitted, after almost a year, that there was no chance of a job. I think it was all a ploy to keep me working harder and harder. An intern desperate for a job can't say no to working late, or anything else for that matter. When I left, only two or three people knew my name.
I was an intern at a startup company that specialises in voucher deals where I was paid £800 a month (before tax, to work 9am-6pm). I was initially overjoyed at the prospect of having a paid internship, so I gladly accepted and thought of myself as one of the lucky ones.
When I arrived it quickly became clear that I was expected to stay as late as 10pm most days, and work overtime at weekends for no extra money, but I didn't feel I could complain. Prior to landing the role I had been searching for a job for months, and the fear of going back to spending all day in my pyjamas meant that I was desperate enough to comply with mad demands.
I was frequently asked to do things from a generic "intern" list that my manager gave out. These included managing other interns, and dealing with customers' complaints.
Just as I was about to quit, I was asked to take on a role with more responsibility and the prospect of a permanent job because the startup was growing so quickly. Even though I wasn't having the best time I assumed I would receive a pay rise, so I accepted. After a month of carrying out my own tasks plus the new entry-level design job, I asked if there was a chance of a pay rise and permanent position as discussed, and was told that since they were now only hiring interns, I would be let go.
Eighteen months out of university, with a degree in journalism and media sitting on my shelf and proving as useful as old newspaper, I took an unpaid internship figuring it was something for the CV and showed some dedication. I signed up to a scheme from a local job-finding charity and soon got offers from a few businesses for positions as a copywriter and designer.
Unfortunately, I chose the worst of them (I assume, I can't imagine anything worse). After a few initial meetings in a cafe (because it was "nice to get out of the office"), I soon realised there was no office. I spent four months writing and designing promotional material on illegally cracked software for a business that did not exist, working either in a cafe or in the guy's living room. This was all on the promise that "investors" were waiting for the materials to be finished before they would fund the business, at which point I would have a paid position.
I figured it was worth it for my CV and I was worried that if I went to an interview with an 18-month gap after graduation it wouldn't look great. Working seven days a week for free showed how hard I was willing to work, so I stuck it out, but I eventually quit after realising the investors were unlikely to materialise.
I worked three part-time jobs to be able to afford to work as an intern during the summer. All in all, I've worked as an intern for 13 months without income, for two separate peers in the House of Lords.
Working for one of them was bizarre to say the least. I was an undergraduate studying political science, doing a year abroad in London. My first job was to go through a book of high-profile events and awards ceremonies, call the organisers and see if his lordship was invited. If he wasn't on the invitation list, I was supposed to drop hints until they asked if he wanted to come. This is how he networked.
My second job was to write parliamentary questions. My instructions were to go through old parliamentary questions and ask the same thing, only changing the wording slightly.
My third job was to draw a cartoon figure for a leaflet. I am not an illustrator.
My fourth job was to book tickets for the peer and his family to Disneyland Paris. When I put together notes for his trip, I recommended exchanging his pounds for euros at the post office as it has a favourable exchange rate. He actually rang to yell at me for suggesting the post office to exchange money. "You're from America, of course, so you don't know that the post office deals with post in this country, not currency." And then he reprimanded me for recommending that he exchange for euros instead of francs, as he was sure France wasn't in the euro yet. This was 2007.
In August, I worked on a feature-length film. I thought it would be valuable, my first real film-set experience, and of course would look amazing on my CV.
I was a runner and script supervisor for the production, a horror film. I worked unpaid for two weeks, living in a scout hut in a forest. We had a cast and crew of around 18 to look after. The work schedule was from 8.30am until 2.30am, with one short break.
Our first task was to drag lighting and cables through the woods. The safety measures were nonexistent – they weren't secured to the ground so there was a constant risk of tripping. That risk became a little more potent when crew members requested that runners take them hot drinks into the middle of a forest in the dead of night. During a midnight coffee run, a fellow intern tripped over a log in the pitch dark and scalded his hand. He had to be rushed to hospital.
I was excited to be script supervisor as I write for a film journalism site. On the first day of filming, I came across a line that wasn't punctuated, and therefore didn't make sense when read out. I asked the actor delivering it how she planned to do it. Later on, during a group meeting, the director singled me out in front of everyone saying I had "tried to take over as director". It was humiliating. I hadn't been told what to do, but assumed checking the script for errors was part of the role.
The worst part of the experience was that an insect bit me on my inner thigh, and running about made it swollen and infected. It grew to the size of one of my hands. I went to an emergency walk-in centre and was given a course of antibiotics. A week after the internship, while still taking antibiotics, which had horrible side-effects, I had a trial as an in-house runner for an editing company. I was unwell and exhausted, and I blew it. I had hoped by doing this internship I'd get my foot in the door of the industry. I'd say my big toe is in the door, but not my whole foot.
My internship was for a designer fashion label in a London department store. I thought I'd struck gold by internship standards – it was £10 an hour working in women's fashion.
I'm male and straight. I didn't think that would be an issue. One day, a week or so into the internship, I met one of the managers for the first time. I was in the fashion cupboard by myself. He walked into the stock room, with bleached hair and tight, very fashionable clothes. He said, "Ah, you're the intern." I introduced myself, and we had a pleasant chat about the work I was doing. Then he turned the conversation to personal stuff.
"Do you have a girlfriend?"
"Ah, right, of course," he said. "So, you have a boyfriend?"
I told him actually no, that I was single and straight. I have no idea why he took that as a cue to put his arms around my waist. I was completely shocked. He moved his hands down and grabbed my thighs. I stepped back and said, "Could you not do that?" It sounds stupid now, but it's all I could think to say at the time.
He said, "What the hell are you doing working in fashion if you're not gay?"
I didn't bump into him again. I felt embarrassed, and I never told my manager. If I was going to complain, I didn't know who to address it to. What struck me later is, he probably wouldn't have done it if I were a real employee. Employees have rights and legal recourse. I was just an intern. I wasn't even given a uniform like everyone else, or a desk, or an email address – the term "intern" doesn't even have a legal definition. Part of me wishes I'd told someone, but I didn't want to damage my chances of getting a job.
On those rare and faith-restoring occasions when an intern is actually offered a full-time, paid job, it can be fascinating to see how they go on to treat other interns. Many will make sure any interns they hire have plenty to do, are not making tea, and feel welcome at the company. I got hired by the other kind.
I was a communications and marketing intern for four months, and I was paid £6 an hour. An actual hourly wage: brilliant! I reported to a guy who had been an intern for five months and then hired. As the new intern, I was subject to his power trip. He was two years younger than me and asked me to make him tea several times a day.
One time I had a contact they wanted – I'd worked for a local paper before and, as interns often do, had worked from my personal email account. So I opened up my Gmail to get it. As soon as the page popped up on my screen he pounced on me and said in a booming stage voice, "You do realise you're not supposed to be on your personal email during work time." I told him I was looking up a contact. He continued in the stage voice: "I don't like to have to tell you off, but that is your personal email. Your work conduct is inappropriate."
On this occasion, people stood up for me, but it didn't end there. I got snipey comments about how bad I was at my job, down to the tiniest details. I was put in charge of the Twitter accounts, and every time I tweeted something he would log in, delete my tweets and redo them.
I went to the manager, but she was friends with him and just said, "He has a certain way of doing things. He can be a bit bossy." They asked me to continue as an intern after the four months, but the once-seductive £6 an hour wasn't worth it.
I was 22, and I found my research and scriptwriting internship on Gumtree. It was unpaid, but they paid travel expenses and said lunch was provided. As I was going to be doing some social media, they also promised "incentives" and "bonuses" if I got more than 10 Twitter followers a week. I was so happy that I'd got something, because I had no experience. It had been a very demoralising time.
I found out that the person who would be showing me how to do the job was also an intern. In fact, everyone who worked for the company either was, or had started out as, an unpaid intern. Video editors, event managers, receptionists, researchers, sales people were all unpaid interns. I wouldn't be surprised if they told me the cleaner was, too.
When I went for lunch on my first day, I opened the fridge to find half a loaf of bread and a half-empty packet of wafer-thin ham. After that, I brought my own food.
We started to buckle under the workload. We were asked to write three scripts a day, which amounted to around 4,500 words. I was also running the social media accounts, and we were expected to do research, download and collate music videos and live shows. It was impossible. We calculated that it would take 22 hours a day to cover our daily workload.
I managed to increase our Twitter followers from 700 to more than 7,000, but the "incentives" I was promised never materialised. I had to continue doing a part-time job on weekends to pay my expenses. In my first month, I worked on 36 out of 40 days. I was exhausted. The hope of landing a job kept me going, until they offered one to my colleague, which took the shine off the dream somewhat: for 40 hours a week, 47 weeks a year, they would pay her £9,000. Pointing out that this was well below the minimum wage, she argued them up to £13,000 – which is still almost impossible to survive on in London.
Then I found out that legally I could be classed as a worker, and was therefore entitled to at least the minimum wage. I posted this on my blog and tweeted the link to two friends who interned with me. My boss saw that I was telling his interns that they have rights, and sacked me for "conspiring against the company". When I showed him the law that stated we deserved to be paid, he interrupted me, refused to read it and dismissed it as "my opinion". Then he said, "All the companies do it nowadays and it works for us."
Italian efforts to revitalise Milan fashion week have received a boost after Giorgio Armani, the country's most famous designer, said he was joining the national body that promotes the industry and co-ordinates the biannual show.
Reversing the stance he has defended for months, the 79-year-old announced he was to become a member of the national chamber of Italian fashion (CNMI) in a bid to show "commitment to the best possible recovery of [the sector's] dynamism".
Concerns have been growing in Italy in recent years that Milan fashion week, inaugurated in 1958, has lost some of its erstwhile energy and creative edge.
In a bid to reboot its credentials, the CNMI appointed a new board of directors, including the outspoken Prada chief executive, Patrizio Bertelli, earlier this year.
It also appointed Jane Reeve as its first chief executive. As a female British marketing executive, she was immediately referred to in Silvio Berlusconi's family newspaper, Il Giornale, as "the Thatcher of fashion".
Following Armani's surprise declaration, there was speculation that the new-look CNMI might succeed where it had previously failed. "It's clear that Jane brings luck," remarked one source.
Armani, who is arguably seen as the most important Italian designer, had been refusing to join the chamber, along with Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana, until all the country's top brands joined him in regularly showing their collections in Milan.
The Milan loyalist had reportedly targeted labels such as Miuccia Prada's Miu Miu for showing in Paris instead of Italy's fashion capital.
But in a statement released on Wednesday, Armani said that he had been impressed by his fellow designer Ennio Capasa's decision earlier this year to bring his Costume National women's summer collection back to Milan from Paris.
That, said Armani, was "an important first step" towards fixing the industry's plight, and now he too was prepared to do his bit.
"While I am still of the opinion that it is necessary for all Italian brands to come back and show in Italy in order to give due prestige to our country, as an entrepreneur I understand that certain situations, which have developed over the years, need time to resolve themselves," he said in a statement.
"I appreciated Ennio Capasa's move – an important first step in this direction. In the hope that other Italian companies follow this example, in the meantime, it seems only right, as well as necessary, for me to send another strong signal of commitment to the best possible recovery of Italian fashion's dynamism and, at the same time, to show a sign of confidence in the actions undertaken by the other brand members of the National Chamber of Italian Fashion."
One in six clothing factories used by Walmart in Bangladesh failed to meet basic standards of structural, fire or electrical safety, the US retailer has found.
Independent inspections for the company – which owns Asda in the UK – found that 32 of its 200 factories required urgent work to fix serious failings, including one factory that was so unsafe it had to be shut down and another with an illegal eighth floor containing the staff canteen.
Most of those factories have since carried out remedial work, but production is still temporarily halted at two factories, which have failed to make the improvements required for basic safety since the inspections started in May.
The inspections were carried out after the Rana Plaza disaster in April, when more than 1,100 workers died and many more were injured after a factory collapsed.
The problems emerged as Walmart published a list of 75 of the 200 factories that had been inspected and rated on electrical and building safety, from A, which would be a model factory, to D, the worst level.
The paperwork did not give details of the problems at each factory, but Jay Jorgensen, the company's global compliance officer, said the worst problems included the factory with an additional floor and another with an extra building that it did not have paperwork for.
Walmart had promised to publish a list of the factories it had inspected in June, but Jorgensen said the process had been delayed by civil unrest and difficulties in sourcing sufficient new materials, such as fire doors.
Jorgensen said Walmart had published the list in order to help other companies sourcing in the country, including the 100-plus signatories to an international factory improvement deal, the accord on fire and building safety in Bangladesh (AFBSB), which Walmart has refused to sign up to.
He said that 65% of the factories used by Walmart were also used by signatories of the accord, and added: "We want to collaborate with the accord."
Workers' rights campaigners slammed the reports as too vague to be helpful. Theresa Haas, of the US-based Worker Rights Consortium, said: "Walmart's reports are superficial at best. They contain no detailed information whatsoever about the results of the inspections or the remediation that has supposedly been carried out and there is no mention of the need to inform workers about risks that have been identified in their workplace.
"Walmart's approach to factory safety has not changed and the company continues to rely on a model that has repeatedly failed to protect workers from fire and building safety disasters."
Meanwhile, Jenny Holdcroft, policy director of the international union IndustriALL, called on Walmart to formally sign the accord. "I honestly don't know what anyone could do with the information they have published," Holdcroft said. She said the accord would be publishing full details of its inspections, which are due to start imminently. She said without proper knowledge of the issues raised by inspectors, workers could unknowingly find themselves working in unsafe conditions.
Jorgensen said Walmart had appointed a permanent team of 10 inspectors who would continue to work with factories, including making a further assessment in January. "We are committed to the welfare over the long haul," he said.
Walmart said that the factory inspections had been carried out over a period of several months by teams of six to 12 inspectors and cost $4m. Some of the money was used to provide training for workers in workplace safety.
A fund provided by the Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety, a group of North American retailers that have fought shy of signing the legally underpinned AFBSB, has helped support workers during factory closures while work was carried out. There are also low-cost loans available through the alliance to help factories make building improvements, but none of those identified by Walmart has taken up that offer.
Paul Smith won't sit still. He's at his desk, behind mountains of knick-knacks, squirming on his seat like a hyperactive schoolboy. "I've got this busy mind," he says, wriggling around on the z-shaped leather chair. "It's just so jammed with stuff, there's no space or time left any more."
He is surrounded by a wunderkammer of bits and bobs, piles of clocks and globes, dolls houses and cameras, amongst which he sits like the gnomic proprietor of a curious antiques shop. It is an exact recreation of his personal study, transposed to the Design Museum for an exhibition that appears to have cracked his busy head open and let it spill out into the galleries in a colourful riot.
The exhibition space is filled with piles of personal ephemera, lining two main walls with his collection of photographs, paintings and prints, and re-staging fascinating room-sets, from his studio to his very first shop, a 3m by 3m windowless room in Nottingham.
"It was so small that it was just me standing there, right in your face," he says. "But I'm not very good at confrontations with strangers."
His solution was to fill the premises with what he calls "icebreakers", bits and pieces scavenged from markets on his travels, from glass ashtrays to antique dolls, to strike up a conversation – and then he'd probably sell you it too, along with the shirt and suit.
Smith says that street markets are his "favourite places in the world", and the show reveals quite how far his capacious appetite for collecting has influenced his work: from Afghan dresses to Zanzibar-print shirts, his ravenous eye sucks it all in and spits it out in heady cross-cultural combinations.
But his clothes make up only a small part of the exhibition. Despite producing 28 collections a year ("to pay the rent"), he finds time to turn his hand to bicycles and snowboards, cameras and rugs.
A room devoted to these "collaborations" shows how he has plastered his trademark stripes on everything from Evian bottles to Mini's, and even a bottle of HP Sauce.
Developed by wrapping coloured thread around strips of cardboard, his psychedelic barcodes have been a victim of their own success. With endless objects smothered in the ubiquitous pattern, it has become a brand too easily wheeled out, leaving the designer imprisoned behind candy-striped bars.
But the exhibition shows that there is much more to Smith's world than the signature stripes. What emerges is a picture of a man who is more a gatherer and curator than a straightforward designer, whose promiscuous interests and boundless energies have seen him try his hand at everything, all at ferocious speed.
It might be good if he slowed down a bit and narrowed his focus. But then again he's never going to sit still for long.
"If you ask a question, I'll give you a pair of socks," announced Sir Paul Smith at the press conference to launch a new exhibition about his life, work and creative process at the Design Museum in London.
And with that, the stiffness in the room was punctured, and reporters jostled for the chance to shout their queries, and in return be lobbed a pair of stripey socks from the front of the room, by the fashion designer.
Smith, whose suits are worn by everyone from David Cameron to Tinie Tempah, Sir Mervyn King to David Beckham, has built a business with an annual turnover of £200m by making people smile. "What he does is create a pleasant experience out of very ordinary things," says Donna Loveday, the exhibition's curator. The Paul Smith brand has captured a combination of lighthearted wit, sophistication and British tradition which succeeds in turning cufflinks, wallets, socks, shirts and ties – the everyday essentials of the British man – into fun and desirable purchases.
Hello My Name Is Paul Smith is a second Design Museum exhibition for Sir Paul Smith. In 1995, the True Brit show marked 25 years of his company; in the 18 years since then his empire has continued to expand, making Smith the most consistently successful fashion designer in Britain and the only one to combine commercial success with critical credibility. A company which began in 1970 with one shop, now has more than 300 stores worldwide.
"Classics with a twist" is a dearly held Paul Smith motto, and the twist in this exhibition is that in an era when fashion exhibitions are increasingly in vogue, this one is not really about fashion at all. Clothes on mannequins play second fiddle to displays celebrating the creative process and the history of Smith's business. This is a deliberate move, intended to convey a message: that creativity and hard work are what matter, rather than money or glory.
"This exhibition is not just about fashion, it's about how Paul sees the world," says Deyan Sudjic, director of the museum. A film made on the day of Smith's most recent Paris menswear show puts the catwalk glamour within business, sales and marketing.
The exhibition includes a theatrical set remake of the Paris hotel room in which Smith showed his first collection to buyers, in 1976. Hiding his own suitcase and personal effects in the bathroom, Smith hung his wares in the wardrobe, and laid out shirts on the bed. But no one came - until 4pm on the last of the four days, when one buyer arrived, and placed an order. "That was what got me started," recalls Smith. "I want to encourage young people and to send a message that from a small beginning you can make progress. It doesn't have to be overnight. Young designers come to me now and they think they need catwalk shows, they need 20 shops straight away. But there was no great turning point in my career, no one moment when I suddenly became famous. It's important to be patient, to be humble, and to enjoy every day. This morning I went for a swim at 5.15am, and was in my office at 6am. The first thing I do in my office is put some vinyl on – today it was Talking Heads – and then I start work."
According to Design Museum staff, when Smith arrived for his press conference, he immediately began tidying the stock in the pop-up shop adjacent to the gallery. "I'm a shopkeeper at heart," he told them.
"Our first meeting about the exhibition took place in Paul's office, surrounded by cameras and bikes and books and toy rabbits and letters, and as we talked it became clear that we needed to recreate this room in the exhibition," says Loveday. The two largest spaces are devoted to displaying a tiny fraction of Smith's personal collection of art and mementos, and to a reproduction of his office, with art tomes, bolts of fabric and postcards from fans. By placing his fashion archive in a supporting role to his workplace and sources of inspiration, the 67-year-old designer makes it clear it is the ongoing creative process which interests him, rather than his legacy. "This is absolutely not a retrospective," he told reporters. "And as for retiring – I don't understand that word."
Fashion website Asos is aiming to tap into the fast-growing Chinese market with the launch of a dedicated website for the country.
"China continues to impress us with its steady growth. The launch will not only help navigate and break down existing barriers, but also dramatically improve the Asos experience for our fast-growing number of Chinese customers," said Nick Robertson, the chief executive.
Asos China is the eighth country-specific site for the e-tailer, which has seen the value of its shares nearly treble to £57.32 in the past year amid soaring sales. Sales are expected to break through the £1bn barrier this financial year as the company benefits from shoppers' switch to the internet and rapid expansion overseas. Asos, which delivers to 237 countries and territories and sells more than 65,000 products, made a profit before tax of £54.7m in the year to August, up 37% on the year before, while sales rose 40% to £753.8m.
Asos China will launch with just 2,000 products, rising to more than 6,000 priced in local currency by spring 2014. It will include both womenswear and menswear. It will stock the Asos own label and gradually introduce brands at all price levels including American Apparel, Mango, Ted Baker and Sonia by Sonia Rykiel.
The launch, on which Asos is spending up to £6m this year, will be supported by local editorial content and newsletters in a bid to drive traffic on Chinese social media sites such as Sina Weibo, in the same way that Asos has prospered from using western sites such as Twitter and Facebook.
• This article was amended on 15 November 2013. An earlier version said Asos operates in 237 countries.
New Look has revealed plans to step up expansion in China, Russia, Poland and Germany despite "challenging trading" at home.
The low-price fashion retailer posted a return to the black with half-year profits to the end of September of £13.8m, compared with a loss of £13.6m a year ago. The company said it added more fashionable products, reduced discounting and tempted shoppers to buy more expensive items.
A 78.8% rise in online sales helped deliver a 6% increase in revenues to £753.2m with underlying sales in the UK up 2.6%.
The company said fur-lined parkas, oversized "boyfriend" coats and boots of all kinds were currently driving sales.
But Anders Kristiansen, New Look's chief executive, said trading had been difficult since September as the benefits of the economic recovery were not being fed through to customers. A warm autumn was also hitting sales. "It's pretty tough out there," he said.
In that environment, Kristiansen said New Look would not seek to raise money via the stock market for at least a year, despite a new appetite for retail stocks. Bonmarché and Poundland are expected to follow the example of Wine Rack owner Conviviality Retail with London listings in the next few months.
"At the moment we are focused on executing our strategy and we need to continue to deliver that. [An IPO] is not something on our mind at the moment," he said.
The departure of New Look's long-term finance director, Alastair Miller, who announced he will leave the company once a successor has been found, is also likely to put major fundraising on hold. Miller is leaving to build a "portfolio career" working with a number of different businesses.
New Look is aiming to build its international presence in four key markets, and plans to enter China for the first time in the spring. Kristiansen said the company had already signed up six stores in shopping malls in and around Beijing and Shanghai, with another 15 that should be open by the end of next year.
In Poland, New Look wants to buy out its local franchise partner and in Russia it is aiming to move from a franchise to a joint-venture so it can accelerate expansion. In Germany New Look has 10 concessions in department stores but now wants to open its own stores.
In all four markets – and France, where New Look owns the Mim chain – the retailer is also planning to open local language websites after enjoying success via Asos, the online fashion store, where sales rose 78% during the half, with two-thirds of sales overseas.
Pringle of Scotland's Chinese owners have pumped more than £10.3m into the knitwear company as the firm continues to suffer losses.
The 198-year-old firm lost £6.3m in the year to January, according to accounts filed at Companies House, although that was an improvement on the £9.5m loss recorded the year before.
Pringle has endured a rocky ride over the last two years, parting company with two design directors. Alistair Carr left in June last year after just over 12 months in the job. He had taken over from Clare Waight Keller who went on to join French label Chloé.
Sales fell 31% to £2.6m in the year to January as Pringle closed its flagship outlet in Sloane Street, west London, before a move to the now more trendy Mount Street in Mayfair in September this year.
The label has never made a profit for the Fang family, the Hong Kong-based owners of clothing retailer Toppy Group, which bought Pringle in 2000 from Scottish firm Dawson International for about £6m. However, Pringle of Scotland's accounts state that investment in the company will continue. Parent group Pringle Enterprises invested £6m in the company in the year to January and a further £4.3m since then, according to the accounts.
Chairman Douglas Fang wrote in the report: "The directors are not expecting to report operating profits in the short term but are satisfied that the development of the brand and of the business are progressing in line with their long-term strategic objectives."
Those objectives include further expansion overseas, with Pringle set to open its first store in mainland China in Chengdu early next year.
Jean Fang, Pringle of Scotland chief executive, said: "Pringle of Scotland has a rich heritage and we are keen to expand this into new global markets through our retail presence."
Pringle closed its original base in Hawick, Scotland, in 2008 and moved some production overseas, although some remains in Scotland.
The average woman in the UK is 5ft 3in tall, weighs 11 stone (70.2kg) and wears a size 16. So the first thing to say about the mannequins launched today in department store Debenhams is that they are not "plus" size, they are bang on average.
So ingrained is the idea that the typical British woman must need to shop at a specialist retailer for chubsters that even the BBC suggests that size 16 is "plus size". With us all being constantly bombarded by images of tall, slender women from billboards, television screens and magazines, is it any wonder that the nation's biggest broadcaster thinks normality is represented by women so skinny that there's a gap between their thighs?
Which is why the use of size 16 mannequins in Debenham's flagship store in London's Oxford Street, the busiest retail street in Europe, is to be welcomed. First introduced for a two-week trial in 2010, it took the retailer three years to produce its 12 mannequins and which will be used alongside the size-10 mannequins that will still be the norm across its 170 stores nationwide.
Debenhams director Ed Watson says: "Having worked on this project for three years, we hope that it will help people in some small way to feel comfortable about their bodies and, crucially, that other retailers will follow."
He may not have said as much, but using average-sized women is also good for business. A recent study from Toronto found that women are three times more likely to buy clothes when the models in advertisements were their size. Widespread use of airbrushing and unhealthily thin models appears to be waning, according to the study by assistant professor Ben Barry.
"Girls and women are sceptical of the thin ideal, digital manipulation, tokenism of diversity and stereotypical messages about age, race and gender," says the report. "They trust advertising that depicts healthy body shapes, realistic signs of age and size, as well as authentic and positive representations of diversity."
Equalities minister Jo Swinson, who launched her own body image review and has done a lot to raise awareness about the issue, welcomed the Debenhams move, saying: "I hope more retailers will recognise that meeting customer demand for more diversity makes good business sense. Many customers want to see more realistic images in magazines, TV and on the high street, and having mannequins that reflect and celebrate our diverse society is one way of helping to achieve this."
So why is Debenhams still rare in having vowed to stop airbrushing, using a size 18 model for its lingerie to "celebrate curves" and for using several models over the age of 40 – including one nearing 70 – and a paralympic athlete to advertise its fashion range? Bigger retailers with a younger market, such as Top Shop, still use tall, size 10 mannequins that bear little or no relation to many of their actual customers. But then again the retailer is about to launch a new range in its lucrative association with a model, Kate Moss, who is famous for saying: "Nothing tastes as good as skinny feels."
Perhaps separately, statistics from campaigners Body Gossip suggest one in 10 young people will develop an eating disorder before they reach the age of 25 (with 1.6 million currently officially diagnosed in the UK).
Natasha Devon, co-director of the group, says we need to fight against the idea that there is one ideal kind of body shape: "We don't want plus-sized models, which could create their own paradigm, but a whole range of body types."
Debenhams made me glad today, but the picture that really cheered me is one of a gorgeous seven-year-old called Holly Greenhow. The little girl has appeared modelling Boden clothes today, the first child to do so whose cerebral palsy makes use of a wheelchair necessary. Her mother Fiona told the Telegraph: "Holly has a beautiful smile and modelling is not all about being perfect, so we thought why shouldn't she be considered." Why not indeed.
I am a model. I model men's clothes. The biological roulette made me female. I was the first woman to be signed to the men's board at Ford Models.
I was invited earlier this week to speak at a conference for business executives at a "trend school" – the topic: gender. I declined – not for lack of desire to share my experience, strength and hope in some helpful way. But I was rather offended by the notion of being so removed from reality as to require a school for trends, and repulsed at the blatant attempt to co-opt and commodify culture for business profit over participation and engagement with it. I also knew that there would be no room for me to break the news: this is not about gender.
So, corporate America, this article is for you.
The contemporary cultural landscape supports a larger interpretation than the one we currently have, of female-masculinity and masculine-femininity. To believe otherwise is to be deceived by a myopic view which is influenced by capitalist gain and profit.
The first thing I want to get out of the way is to ask you to look at this list: Gertrude Stein, Greta Garbo, Jenny Shimizu, Tilda Swinton, Jack Halberstam, Stella Tennant, Judith Butler, Erika Linder … it goes on. If you do not know who everyone on the list is, go look them up, your life will be larger for it. You should, after that, realise that this is not a question of "trend". There is a historical tradition you should know about and it is certainly not about gender. It is about being fierce.
The cultural context further supports this wider angled discourse on the acceptance of difference (or lack thereof) beyond the specifics of female-masculinity and masculine-feminity and posits the isolated focus on gender as incorrect. Russia, Edith Windsor and Bethann Hardison are three examples – the first being a terrifying contemporary example of institutionalised homophobia and homogeneity; the second, our own attempt here in the US to de-institutionalise homophobia via gay marriage; and the last being a fashion legend calling into question the enduring racism within fashion. The fashion industry is on its way to being the better for it.
We are only too familiar with the mainstream's difficulty in celebrating difference (when it's not being entirely destructive to it). Corporations and the traditional media have not yet learned how to resolve this: in the public discourse the celebration is often sanitised and white-washed (sometimes literally) for profit – and by this I do mean corporate profit.
And why should you care about this? Because we have in our societies children and teenagers and we are responsible for their wellbeing. This is on us. And why do I specifically care about this? Why am I bothering to write this? Because I'm gay. I'm butch. I'm a woman. I'm queer. I'm 36. I'm 6ft 2in. And caring for "otherness" matters to me. Gay youth is still terrorised for being different in some parts of the world – Russia is a horrifying example of this. But look, too, at what still happens here in the US. Children are made to feel shame, they are made to feel ugly, they are ostracised and bullied, or worse – and here in New York I see them on the streets – 40% of homeless youth are LGBTQI identified.
If images of me out there in the world make it that much easier for another kid, and the kids around them or their parents, to get on with the more important business of figuring out who they are and how they can uniquely contribute to the stream of life, then my job is done. The clincher: while unique in my contribution, I am not alone in expanding the landscape – Brittney Griner, JD Samson, Venus X, A$AP Rocky, OFWGKTA – are all examples of non-conformity and also of excellence.
This is about making space, making room and making things better. To limit this conversation to the (albeit salacious) red herring of gender is dangerous, careless and nothing short of ignorant – it takes for granted the intelligence and wellbeing of our communities (offering only an uneducated, uninteresting and sensationalist conversation to boot). It shames those who are gender-conformative and perpetuates a construct of homogeneity and belonging that is nothing short of destructive for our youth. It offers a false sense of privilege and ignorance to those who "fit" the norm (or trend) while potentially destroying those who don't and ignoring those who are able to survive outside of it.
I will not let this become just the other side to the same coin of oppression, a false emancipation at the cost of others.
This is too important and deserves closer examination and care. Lives depend on it.
In September news leaked that David Bowie would be appearing in the new Louis Vuitton advert. Here is the first picture from that campaign
• Read Alexis Petridis on the inside story of how David Bowie made The Next Day
• Why the Peaky Blinders look is the hot new thing in men's fashion
Shares in the world's largest luxury goods group, LVMH, fell sharply on Wednesday as it reported slowing growth in sales of its designer clothes and monogrammed handbags.
The company behind Louis Vuitton and Dior said that sales in its high-profile fashion and leather goods division grew by 4% for the first nine months of the year, compared with 5% during the first half – and some analyst forecasts for growth of 10%.
Fashion sales were €7.1bn (£6bn) for the first nine months of the year out of total revenues of €20.7bn for the whole group, which also includes Guerlain perfume, Tag Heuer watches, Moët champagne and Hennessy cognac.
LVMH's share price dropped 6% on France's CAC 40 index on Wednesday as investors digested the unexpectedly poor performance.
The sales slowdown in fashion comes amid a major shake-up at the top of Louis Vuitton, following the decision of designer Marc Jacobs to leave the group to create his own label. Nicolas Ghesquière, the former creative director of Balenciaga, is rumoured to be replacing him, although the group is insisting that no decisions have been taken. Earlier this year, LVMH's founder and chief executive, Bernard Arnault, promoted his daughter Delphine Arnault, a former managing director at Dior, to be Louis Vuitton's second in command.
The slowdown did not affect demand for champagne: the group reported a strong rebound in champagne sales over the third quarter of the year, driven by a strong appetite for the drink in Asia and America.
The group also reported continued market share gains for its Sephora perfume shops, currently at the centre of a political row in France over the opening hours of its flagship store in Paris. Combined with strong performance from the group's duty free-retail shops, the retail division pulled in €6.3bn revenues, a 19% increase on last year.
Shares in luxury fashion group Burberry continued to fall on Wednesday after news of the departure of chief executive, Angela Ahrendts. In midmorning trading the company's shares were the biggest faller on the FTSE 100, dropping 2.5% to £14.28, after a 6% fall on Tuesday.
If high street fashion rises above the tawdry meanness and dismal blandness purveyed by the average dress shop in this country, it is likely to emanate these days from a growing chain of shops called Warehouse. Created four years ago by Jeff Banks, the imagination and panache of his concept was rewarded last Wednesday evening on television when he was voted Designer of the Year in The Woman British Fashion Awards.
Jeff Banks has in fact been in the business for 18 years. Having trained as a textile and interior designer at Camberwell and St Martin's Schools of Art, he first made a name for himself in 1964, with a small shop rented for £ll.00 a week in Blackheath, stocked by designer-friends like Marion Foale and Sally Tuffin, Janice Wainwright and Moya Bowler. With the help of a partner in public relations, 'Clobber,' as it was named, sold out on the first day. Mounted policemen prevented it from being mobbed by thousands of eager customers. The crocheted dresses and puff-sleeved blouses so beloved by the 'dollybirds' of the day were his creation.
But the momentum of the Sixties was dissipated and, somewhere along the way, the fashion industry ceased to utilise the best of British design capabilities. The abuse of creative talent by multiple retailing outlets, who stunt original growth by reducing design to the common denominator, is a subject about which Banks feels strongly: 'It always annoys me when it is said that chain stores are doing a great job 'supplying knickers to every woman in the country. I don't think she has the selection of quality or design she should have.'
Jeff Banks manages to supply these requirements by keeping in touch with the needs of ordinary women. 'I have never made a lot of money and so I haven't grown away from my roots.' He believes he employs a string of the best designers in the country and offers their designs very economically. About half the stock is of British manufacture: T-shirts are made in Leicester; skirts at a company run by ladies in a disused chapel at Reading; the justly famed designs in leather and suede, the tweeds, flannels and denims are all British, as opposed to the silks, which are imported. All evidence that the potential is available in this country if approached in the right way. His turnover was around £3 million last year and looks like increasing substantially.
Jeff Banks strongly believes in the capacity of art and design to improve people's lives, a faith reflected in his patronage of art school talents: 'In 20 years' time, I think they will have a much larger role to play.' He has just initiated his own experimental course at the College of Distributive Trades for high-calibre trainees, in an effort to cement the gap between further education and industry. Seven students have been enrolled from 700 applicants for the intensive programme which covers 22 subjects and combines work in the company with study sessions. Of course, it is a gamble he admits, and it is only beginning to pay off.
He has given up the wholesale side of his business and is opting for slightly larger and fewer outlets, to cut overheads. The first Warehouse catalogue has been produced, part mail order and part a statement about the latest clothes. He receives a constant feedback of criticisms through the staff and is wary of tackling the export market because, 'we are still trying to get it right here.'
For the moment, he says, 'I'm pleased to be on the threshold of something yet again. A lot of my contemporaries have given up - but it is great to be around for a new wave.'
Angela Ahrendts said in her surprise exit statement that she was leaving Burberry in great shape. She mentioned a powerful management team, world-class supply chain, state-of-the-art technology and brand momentum. Modesty, or perhaps CEO etiquette, prevented her from saying just how instrumental Ahrendts has been in transforming the brand with the "check problem" into an international powerhouse.
She and Christopher Bailey – the self styled chief creative officer who will now take on the CEO role in addition to his creative duties – have made a crack team over the past seven years. Ahrendts, the Diet-Coke-swigging businesswoman from Indiana, and Bailey the softly spoken Yorkshireman with a penchant for indie music and technology. Fashion folklore has it that the two of them plotted their plans for the brand by scribbling on a napkin over lunch.
While Bailey worked on reinventing the trench and producing catwalk shows that – among other climate-inspired arty touches – rained petals on the models, Ahrendts went about the business of transformation. Within a year of her joining in 2006 she had sacked the entire Hong Kong design team and closed factories in New Jersey and the Rhondda Valley, south Wales, to centralise manufacturing in Castleford, West Yorkshire. She brought back licences in order to exercise tight control over the brand image and booked the megastars for the brand's campaigns – from Kate Moss to Rosie Huntington-Whiteley. It was swift work, executed with a razor-sharp focus.
There is no question that Burberry's loss will be Apple's gain. Ahrendts – the driven mother of three who rises at 5am – is one of just three women named on the FTSE 100 list. Her earnings (£16.9m last year), make her the highest-paid person in British business. Many people have already pointed out that there being one fewer woman in a UK boardroom is sad news. But her move raises other questions too. Not least why there is such an impetus to recruit fashion-industry power-players at Apple right now. Former Yves Saint Laurent CEO Paul Deneve went to Apple in July and Nike design director Ben Shaffer was hired by the brand last month. Logic suggests that these three appointments mean that wearable technology could be high on Apple's agenda next year.
Meanwhile, the prospect of a solo Christopher Bailey helming both the business and creative sides at Burberry raises questions too. No doubt Ahrendts left the business in a slick state and Bailey's time working next to her must amount to the most useful business apprenticeship in the world. But to have such absolute control over the brand does raise the suggestion that Bailey is on his way to becoming Louis XIV in a rather fabulous trench coat.
Home secretary Theresa May's favourite shoe shop, Russell & Bromley, stepped up sales but saw profits slip back last year amid rising costs.
The Bromley family, which has controlled the chain since it was founded nearly 120 years ago, paid themselves £6.97m in dividends, down from nearly £12m a year before, as pre-tax profits fell 6.5% to £19.5m for the last calendar year.
Sales rose 6.3% to £107.4m as the upmarket retailer, whose diamante-heeled Polly lace-ups were worn by May at the Conservative party conference in Manchester last month, continued to thrive during the economic downturn.
The shoe chain was also responsible for May's famous leopard-print heels which she wore when she told the Tories they had become known as the "nasty party" in 2002. In-house designer Beverly Feldman has had shoes custom-made for the home secretary.
Russell & Bromley launched an online store in November last year and has 45 shops including a handful of children's-only outlets.
The first Russell & Bromley store was in Eastbourne, East Sussex, when George Bromley and his wife took over the running of her family's shop in 1880. The firm moved to Bromley, Kent, in 1905 and is still based there today.
The company's directors are all Bromley family members, led by Roger Bromley, great-grandson of the founder, who owns about a third of the shoe firm's shares and is still involved in designing the collections. His nephews, Andrew and Stuart, also help run the company.
For a week, Manchester's Deansgate has been decked with banners advertising Fashion's Night Out, presaging the descent of Vogue's fash-pack in the frozen wastes of the North on Wednesday night.
As a Vogue devotee and fashion lover, I decided to drop by and see what all the fuss was about. The event was billed as a 'fashion extravaganza' that would involve the city's chicest shops staying open til 10pm, hosting designers including Matthew Williamson, Sarah Burton and Jonathan Saunders, and featuring celebrity DJ sets from Pixie Geldoff, Jameela Jamil and the Maccabees.
I got to Hugo Boss early, where Vogue editor Alexandra Shulman was tipped to begin her evening, and proceeded to be glared at by a bunch of unfriendly bouncers. I didn't blame them too much, the southern softies were clearly feeling the cold. As a freelancer, I didn't have any card or tag that identified me as representing the Guardian's Northerner blog and for a while, it didn't look like I was getting anywhere near the door of what seemed to be a private party.
However, I was finally taken pity on by a kind Vogue-related woman and allowed into the hallowed (and very warm) interior of the Hugo Boss. There were lots of cocktails and stretched, lipsticky smiles and people who generally seemed very ill-at-ease, drinking champers in a brightly-lit shop while a crowd of people gathered in the cold outside, trying to see in.
Shulman was soberly dressed and didn't look as aggressively 'fashion' as most of the women present (ie 6ft with eye-wateringly small waistlines). I asked her about whether she thought style was different in the north of England. "I don't think it's as simple as a north/south divide," she said.
"All big cities have their own style. Manchester seems to have a two-pronged approach: one is very glamourous, feminine, out there, partying style. Then you've got a very gritty, urban, club music style … In fact, it's not that different to London in that way." Shulman added that "Northern designers have a kind of conviction about them, but I suppose all designers have to have that anyway".
I headed over to Flannels where Matthew Williamson was expected to make a guest appearance. He was fashionably late and told the Guardian: "I think Northern style is very cool, although I don't like using that word". Come now, Matthew. You're a Manchester boy, surely you have more than 'cool' in your descriptive arsenal? Before I could press the matter, his bother stepped in to warn me off with a snarl: that's your one question. Undeterred, I wandered among the girls having free manicures and picking at canapes and toting hideously expensive handbags. What struck me was that no one really seemed to be having much fun. The whole 'joy of shopping' thing that the event was supposed to inspire wasn't happening. Bored-looking people with deep pockets and seriously uncomfortable shoes browsed rails and when a few of them got to talk to Williamson, they became instantly animated and laughed like wind-up toys.
The proceeds from the Fashion's Night Out T-shirts, created by GAP, went to Save the Children and the charity chosen by Shulman. Claire Filler, regional fundraising manager for Save the Children said the event was "fantastic for the north-west, fantastic for us, and fantastic for students from the University of Manchester, who have started a Save the Children society and are selling the t-shirts".
The charitable element of the evening was largely overlooked and none of the browsers I spoke to had any idea that Save the Children were involved, although the sales of their Hermes bags could've saved quite a few children.
The free cocktails and sushi looked exquisite, but the whole evening felt empty and lacking point. It seemed to be an opportunity for designer shops to stay open a bit later and for people with large disposable incomes to buy things and have their pictures snapped in the same vicinity as a couple of fashion names. I came out feeling like some kind of poverty-stricken street urchin, and very disappointed that the whole thing seemed to be about spending money, rather than a celebration of style or creativity.
Annie & Lisa, Manchester: "Up North we have a more diverse look, we've not got a point to prove and we're not always on show"
Sabriyah, Manchester: "I think London style is more eclectic, they put more thought into their outfits despite seeming effortless. Northern style is more to do with following trends"
Katie, Leeds: "Northern style is more grungy and urban, we're not as posh as those girls in London!"
Nicky, Manchester: "Northern girls are more eclectic in what they chose, they're not afraid to go wild and really dress up"
Danni, Glasgow: "In the North we're still a wee bit glam... we like our big nights out!"
• Harriet Williamson is a freelance journalist. She can be found tweeting at @harriepw and blogging at harrietpwilliamson.blogspot.com
Fashion chain Whistles is to move into menswear next year after swinging into the black for the first time since a buy-out led by former Topshop boss Jane Shepherdson in 2008.
The company, which is owned by its management and other private investors as well as two Icelandic banks, made a pre-tax profit of £1.1m in the year to January, up from a £1m loss the year before, as underlying UK sales rose 20%.
Shepherdson said: "We had a fantastic year. It's taken a while to get the aesthetic completely right and find out which things people love to buy from us. Now we've got things right we're growing."
She said dresses, many in prints designed in-house for the brand, as well as cashmere, leather jackets and skirts were all selling well this season as sales continued to rise, particularly online.
Total sales at the retailer, which has about 90 UK outlets including 48 standalone stores, rose 24% to £49.3m last year as it expanded into Germany and Hong Kong.
After a successful tie-up with department store Lane Crawford in Hong Kong, the brand will now move into mainland China with concessions in Beijing and Shanghai planned this autumn. Shepherdson's former employer Sir Philip Green also announced a move into China this week with the Topshop chain.
Shepherdson said she had wanted to offer menswear since arriving at Whistles but now felt it was the right time amid increased demand for a contemporary clothing at mid-market prices. "It's an obvious thing to do as we are not an overly feminine brand and the department stores we work with have been asking for it. There's a gap in the market for menswear at Whistles' price point."
Shepherdson said that Whistles, which was founded in 1978, also had room to grow in the UK, particularly in London, and places where it is not represented such as Birmingham.
The news that Whistles is moving into menswear is enough to put spring in one's step – whatever your gender. The high-street brand has come to be treasured by women who love smart, useful (but never boring) clothes that appeal to minimalist sensibilities while keeping fun on the agenda . That's a brand DNA that hits the ground running in menswear. While no images have been released as yet, you imagine these pieces will sit next to those inclined to Cos and – when they're feeling flush – Lanvin, Raf Simons or a printed sweatshirt from Givenchy.
The introduction of menswear comes on the back of more excellent financial results for the growing brand. Sales went up 24% in 2012. While no figures are available for this year, the trend is continuing, with international expansion into Europe, Russia and China paying off. Menswear now makes sense. "We recognise that, as with womenswear, there is considerable expansion in the contemporary middle market," Shepherdson said in a statement. "This is an ideal time to capitalise on this opportunity and bring the Whistles aesthetic to menswear."
The sure-fire hit that this will be makes you wonder why they haven't done it before. But Whistles, since CEO Jane Shepherdson took over in 2008, has masterminded its rise expertly. Going in all guns blazing is not the Shepherdson way. Take the brand's London fashion week profile as a case in point. In September, Shepherdson's former employer Topshop had a high-profile show with Jourdan and Cara low-fiving on the catwalk. Whistles' show was quieter – but you could feel the front row ordering pieces as models walked by.
They'll no doubt take their time on this one too. Launching for autumn/winter 2014, and with a design team working under design director Nick Passmore, it's unclear if they'll show it at London's menswear showcase, London Collections: Men in June. Our gut feeling is no. Shepherdson – as is her instinct – will give this one time to grow. But rest assured, better dressed men on the high street are in the post.
 Designer Pam Hogg, who won the Scottish creative excellence award – but pictured holding the Scottish model of the year award
A fire on Tuesday at a garment factory outside Bangladesh's capital, Dhaka, has killed at least 10 people.
Fire official Zafar Ahmed said 10 bodies were found inside the four-storey building housing the Aswad garment factory in Gazipur.
Journalist Iqbal Ahmed said the fire occurred when the factory was closed for the day, but some employees were inside working overtime.
Farhaduzzaman, another fire official, said the blaze spread to two nearby buildings that also housed garment factories in the same group, but that firefighters had doused the flames in two of the buildings and were seeking to bring the blaze under control in the third building. He could not immediately say whether any people were still trapped inside.
The cause of the fire was not immediately known.
Harsh and often unsafe working conditions in Bangladesh's garment industry drew global attention after the collapse of the eight-storey Rana Plaza factory building in April killed more than 1,100 people. The industry has experienced numerous fires, including one last November that killed 112 workers.
Bangladesh earns $20bn (£12.4bn) a year from garment exports, mainly to the United States and Europe. The sector employs about 4 million workers, mostly women.
Authorities in Bangladesh and global clothing companies have pledged to improve safety standards.
Kate Moss could lead Topshop into China after the fashion chain's billionaire owner Sir Philip Green said he was in "advanced discussions" to open its first outlets in the country.
With the model set to put her name to a new collection for the retailer, due to launch in 40 countries next April, Green said: "We could use that as an opportunity to open 20 to 30 pop-up stores within department stores in China."
Moss's latest collaboration with Topshop will be the first since she walked away from a previous project three years ago. The model, who was paid a reported £3m for her first collaboration, will work on the new collection with stylist Katy England and Topshop's creative director, Kate Phelan. At 39, she is old enough to be the mother of many Topshop customers, but Green insisted she still had fashion influence.
"Show me anybody with better fashion credibility. She's spent 20 years in the industry – who knows the business better?"
Using Moss's name in China would echo Topshop's move into the US four years ago, where the model's worldwide appeal helped secure sites in a number of Nordstrom stores as well as four standalone stores.
Green, who opened a Topshop store in Hong Kong this summer, said he was in negotiations with a number of parties about different opportunities on the mainland, and Topshop's China launch might also begin with standalone stores alongside department store outlets.
He could not say when these might open but said: "We can open in any market pretty quickly. If we did the deal tomorrow we could open in six weeks."
Green is also looking at pop-up shops for Topshop Unique, the catwalk range which showed during London fashion week.
Meanwhile, Topshop is continuing its expansion trail in the US where it is just completing the opening of 20 new Nordstrom outlets. Green said more could follow next year if the current batch perform well, and there could be as many as 70 across the country in future as well as standalone stores. He is in negotiations to open four of five more high street outlets with plans for at least one more New York store.
This year the Arcadia Group, which includes Dorothy Perkins, Burton, Miss Selfridge, Wallis and Evans as well as Topshop, has opened 154 new stores globally, taking its total to about 700.
In the UK, Green is conducting a "capital investment review" amid increased competition from the internet and rival chains. Each of the Arcadia brands has been asked to make a pitch on how it could rejuvenate the look of its stores.
Green would not put a figure on his investment plans but said trial revamps of Dorothy Perkins and Burton stores in Bluewater, Kent, and an Evans store on Oxford Street, London, had produced double-digit increases in sales. He said each chain could get a budget to try an updated look in 10 to 30 stores.
Green has previously announced plans to pull out of 200 to 300 smaller stores when leases expire and he confirmed that process was continuing.
• This article was changed on 11 October to correct the spelling of Nordstrom
[This was the first article in The Permissive Society, a celebrated series with a title which coined a national phrase.]
"But I love vulgarity. Good taste is death, vulgarity is life." I had asked Mary Quant whether she did not feel there to be an element of vulgarity in cut-out and see-through dresses which, giving an illusion of nothing beneath, can be regarded as an aspect of the permissive society.
"People call things vulgar when they are new. When they have become old they become good taste. Fashion reflects what is really in the air. It reflects what people are reading and thinking and listening to, and architecture, painting, attitudes to success and to society. People only see permissiveness in the sense of having more. But the young today are less materialistic and more intelligent than ever. And they've got sex in perspective, they're not hung up on it any more, it's not difficult, they take it or leave it alone."
"You would agree that there is an element of brutalism in fashion today? The intention [of some fashion photographers] is to shock, although the possibilities of shocking our present society without being pornographic must soon be exhausted."
"Pornography is great if it's good."
"Good pornography is erotic but pleasing. Only ugliness is obscene."
Earlier we had looked at some of the photographs in a glossy magazine and paused at one of a model girl in knickerbockers lying on her back with her legs straddled up in the air.
"You see," Mary had said, "this is a tremendously sexy picture, but the girl is more inaccessible than she would be in any other period of fashion. She's got those thick tweed knickerbockers buckled tight under the knee, and she'll have stocking tights underneath and perhaps a pantie girdle. That's the thing about today's fashions - they're sexy to look at but really more puritan than ever."
"You know James Laver's famous fashion theory of the erogenous zone which shifts the focus of attraction in different periods ... what is the erogenous zone of our present period?"
"The crutch ... the most natural erogenous zone. Clothes are designed to lead the eye to it. It's not 'come hither,' but it's provocative. She's standing there defiantly with her legs apart saying 'I'm very sexy, I enjoy sex, I feel provocative, but you're going to have a job to get me. You've got to excite me and you've got to be jolly marvellous to attract me...' Now that there is the pill, women are the sex in charge. They, and they only, can decide to conceive."
Never mind exactly what Rihanna is wearing, or where Alexa Chung got her new bag: the pressing news on the high street is about ethics. It's now six months on from the Rana Plaza catastrophe, in which a garment factory collapsed in Bangladesh, killing at least 1,133, with a further 2,500 injured and many left severely disabled. Tragically, Rana Plaza wasn't a unique accident. Fires and building collapses are endemic in the assembly part of the fashion-supply chain (at least 112 workers were killed at the Tazreen factory fire in Dhaka in November 2012). Campaigners and analysts have highlighted the dangers in today's "fast fashion" supply chain that increase the probability of such catastrophes.
"Fast fashion" desperately needs to reinvent its supply chain. With business worth £44.5bn, the UK high street is a world leader in fashion: now it's time to add substance to our style. And as consumers, it's our responsibility to understand a bit more about supply-chain ethics, and act on that information. Report after report shows that members of the cut, make and trim army (the millions who toil in China, Bangladesh, India and Cambodia – the hubs of high-street fashion production) work for wages that barely cover necessities. Meanwhile the economic perks for us as consumers are unbelievable: we've never had access to fashion this cheap.
The pressure on workers is enormous. In the speed to fulfil contracts for hundreds of thousands of units of a single design to a short deadline, gambles are taken with human rights and worker safety. A recent Panorama programme, "Dying for a Bargain", once again showed the total fallacy of factory audits as finish times for workers were falsified and workers locked into factories. Research also shows how many western fashion buyers base their calculations on misleading industry standards set on 100% efficient factories. The sorry garment production facilities in some cities are worlds away from efficient, so the workers cannot but fail.
For Fashion Revolution Day a coalition of fashion experts and campaigners will commemorate the victims of Rana Plaza on the first anniversary of the collapse, 24 April 2014. Ideas to prevent such disasters happening again include creating more slack in supply times. If brands extend their deadlines and increase lead times (even by seven days) this could save lives. But my research (distilled into the list below) shows little appetite for that sort of let-up from any of the main retailers.
So who on the high street is facing up to these problems? To find out, I waded through the research and spoke to NGOs, and I sent a questionnaire to the main high-street brands to gauge their position on supply chain ethics. Some chose to engage, some did not. You can find their responses below.
Below is a list of some of the retailers and retail groups which are, I believe, doing the most to tackle the supply-chain issue. Size matters in fast fashion, so my list concentrated on the big players in terms of sales and volume market share. I have a bias: I believe the Bangladesh Fire and Safety Accord is the best hope we have of improving safety in that country. Essentially built from the rubble of Rana Plaza, it is a contract between the retailers and the trade unions in Bangladesh. It's a legally binding, five-year pact that makes independent safety inspections of factories and public reporting on them mandatory. The first list of 1,500 Bangladesh factories to be inspected has just been published. It is also the first-ever multi-buyer collective agreement (brands like to act as lone wolves, which is part of the problem) – but 93 have signed so far. All the retailers that feature here have signed up.
Finally – a huge caveat – none of these brands can guarantee that they won't be involved in a Rana Plaza tragedy tomorrow. Even for our top-tier retailers, there is a very long way to go.
Who? Exactly. I didn't ask JD Williams to complete a questionnaire, as it wasn't on my radar. However it has been praised by NGOs for taking a co-ordinating role and driving the Bangladesh Accord forward. The company comprises 30 brands, including Figleaves and High and Mighty – it's a high-street (and online) stalwart. Its approach to supply-chain ethics following Rana Plaza is notable because it sees the Accord as a chance for smaller brands to step up and take the lead: JD Williams has personnel working on the Accord. Other brands should take note.
The Swedish giant (which includes Cos, & Other Stories and Cheap Monday in its portfolio) was the first major signatory of the Bangladesh Accord. It's the biggest player in Bangladesh (some estimates suggest 20-25% of its inventory comes from the country) and this encouraged others to follow suit.
H&M used to use glossy messaging about its corporate social responsibility (CSR) and a new collection of "conscious clothes" to flag its ethical message, but now it is more engaged with worker rights on the ground. Union partners report that they can phone a contact in the Stockholm head office if they need to discuss any issues.
Some NGO insiders praise the way the brand eventually settled a case in Cambodia this year in which a factory's owners cut and ran, leaving workers destitute. H&M paid a settlement.
Click here to see H&M's responses to Lucy's questionnaire
Primark's position in this list may seem counterintuitive, especially as it was one of the brands using Rana Plaza. However, we shouldn't be too judgmental on the companies using the facility. As Sam Maher of campaign group Labour Behind the Label told me just after the disaster: "It could have been any of the high-street retailers." In the NGO/campaign world Primark was praised for getting a team to Dhaka, coming up with a credible compensation scheme and working with unions and agencies to provide immediate food aid.
Primark owned up. The brands denying involvement in Rana Plaza cost labour rights organisations time as they sifted through rubble painstakingly finding inventory evidence from the paper trail. If companies don't come forward and provide emergency relief and compensation, families and workers suffer more. When NGOs met recently in Geneva, concerned that the families of Rana Plaza needed help, Primark provided the equivalent of three months' salary for 3,300 people.
Activist and union representatives think Primark could be more open to collaborative union action (acknowledged as the only way to really change conditions). It is known by supplier factories as a brand that "pays up", offering 30-day payment terms to factory owners (as opposed to the standard 60-90 days, which can leave businesses desperate). But campaigners wonder if this seemingly fairer arrangement could ultimately be used to drive prices down.
Click here to see Primark's responses to Lucy's questionnaire
Under its eco scheme, Plan A, M&S has experimented with a range of initiatives to improve ethics in garment production. The company is known for stable, long-term relationships with supplier factories. This represents a big tick in an industry typified by chaotic, last-minute ordering from whichever factory is cheaper.
M&S does like a technical solution. It has pioneered a model factory programme in Bangladesh. It has also re-engineered the assembly line, retraining employees as machinists, which means a salary raise. M&S is the first major retailer to have committed to ensuring clothing suppliers are able to pay workers a fair living wage in the least-developed countries they source from, starting with Bangladesh, India and Sri Lanka by 2015. But campaigners said they lack an idea of what M&S considers to be a living wage. M&S has yet to publish a list of supplier factories (answering my questionnaire, it cites "commercial confidentiality" for this buttoned-up approach).
Click here to see Marks and Spencer's responses to Lucy's questionnaire
An early signatory of the Bangladesh Accord, John Lewis has a relatively good history when it comes to sourcing. It tends to work with long-term suppliers (which develops a more healthy, sustainable pattern, where abuses are less likely to occur) and offers mainstream access to pioneering ethical brands, such as People Tree. I value Safia Minney's brand, which has become more trend-led, teaming up with designers such as Orla Kiely, but which always begins and ends with the needs of the producer (the opposite to the high-street fashion model).
If you're wondering what Tesco is doing on a fashion list, it's one of the biggest retailers of value clothing in the UK and a significant player in Bangladesh. I have issues with supermarkets moving in on the fashion pound, in the way they have hoovered up much else, and I hate the fact clothes end up in a trolley as consumables, but Tesco has helped drive the Bangladesh Accord from the front (it banned Uzbek cotton – picked by enforced child and student labour – from its vast chain). It produced a wide-selling "upcycled" collection with ethical designer Orsola de Castro, and has made innovative use of overstock fabric (held on a vast scale by most big brands, and which often ends up being shredded).
Click here to see Tesco's responses to Lucy's questionnaire
Credited (or blamed) for redefining the fashion industry by introducing new ranges each week, Inditex has a charge to answer in terms of fuelling unsustainable consumption. Yet when the Spectrum factory collapsed in 2005 in Bangladesh, killing 64 and seriously injuring 20, Amancio Ortega (the then-owner of Zara) pushed through €600,000 compensation – remarkable in the context of the current production system. While praising a company for its work after an avoidable disaster may seem questionable, this set an industry standard.
Inditex has good relationships with trade unions, particularly in Europe, where it claims to manufacture much of its fast-turnaround product (getting fashion into stores in days). However it is unclear what percentage Inditex sources from Europe and overseas.
Following the Rana Plaza tragedy, Sir Philip Green's empire sent out a press release to the effect that Arcadia had signed the Bangladesh Accord. Mysteriously, it transpired that was not the case, and it finally joined up last month. Arcadia makes the point that it does relatively little business in Bangladesh. On the plus side, it has experienced buyers and offices in its sourcing countries rather than devolving all responsibilities to import agencies, so the company should know where its clothes come from. However, it's not a business rated for its collaborative approach, so it's difficult to know much more.
Over cups of black cardamom tea, a group of young women try on glamorous high-fashion dresses and discuss which ensemble would be best for Friday's mehmouni, or party.
The women are in an Iranian maison – "house" in French – a private retail space of a type often located in the proprietor's home, making way for headscarves to come undone, revealing blonde highlights and carefully crafted hairdos. Manicured nails, groomed eyebrows, and faces full of thick make-up all go to show the extent to which Iranian women will go to look good everyday.
Tucked away behind closed doors, maisons cater to a middle- and upper-class clientele, providing a more comfortable shopping experience than do publicly accessible boutiques. They also afford Iranian women a prime opportunity to generate income in a patriarchal society where they are discouraged from working or have to struggle to secure a decent job. Many women involved in the retail business start out selling from home to avoid the expense of renting a store. With its relatively low startup costs, the maison scene facilitates the emergence of new fashion talent, as well.
"All over the place, every week you hear new names and especially young ladies who don't even have that much money," says Dorsai, who ran Moonlight, a custom clothing design business, from 2004 to 2009. "They start with a few garments. They sell them to their friends and family from home and gradually their business grows. It's a new revelation for Iranian women – making an income and being a bit more independent."
Dorsai ran Moonlight from her home in northern Tehran. Now living abroad, she frequently travels back to Iran and stays connected with the maison scene. Comfort, in her view, is the number one benefit that derives from selling and shopping for clothes in a domestic setting. "Iran is an Islamic country, so women have to kind of suffer in heat to have hejab all the while when they are out," she says. "The best part of working at home is you and your costumers are free."
Moonlight specialised in everyday clothing for women looking for fashionable styles of Islamic dress. After studying at the London College of Fashion, Dorsai came back to Iran with ideas about how to spruce up the traditional dowdy manteau – a long, form-concealing coat, customarily black. She used bright, rich colours and embellished garments with characteristically Persian patterns inspired by the fabled architecture of Isfahan and clothing styles from the Safavid and Qajar periods.
Dorsai promoted her designs by advertising in local magazines and making calls to existing customers. Much of the time, maisons grow by word of mouth. "My customers themselves, they were my best advertisers. Around town they looked good, different, and people asked them where they got their manteaus," she says.
Doing her own sewing at first, Dorsai eventually hired a staff of five male tailors to quickly produce her in-demand manteaus, which sold for 40,000 to 120,000 tomans (roughly $50 to $150 at the time). Due to sanctions' effect on fabric imports, the prices varied over the years. Overall, maison prices at the high end are similar to those at boutiques, especially for custom-made designs like those at Moonlight.
Since last year, Parinaz has owned the maison Günes, which means "sun" in Turkish. As an Iranian of Turkish decent, she decided to make her brand stand out by selling clothes only from Turkey. The items in her line, mostly fancy party dresses and youthful urban wear, used to come to Iran through a qhachaqhchi, or smuggler, who brought them illegally across the Turkish border – a well-trafficked smuggling route. The last such transaction fell through, however, when the qhuachaqhchi failed to deliver. "Half of our clothes did not arrive," says Parinaz. "It is a hard thing to do. These are the risks." Now, she will travel to Turkey to bring the clothing back herself and run the possibility of paying a fine at the airport.
Due to the failed deal and the rising rent of the office space in northern Tehran where her maison was originally located, Parinaz recently moved Günes into her home. She and her husband remodeled their house to keep store operations separate from their personal space. Anyway, she says, she is serving fewer customers as women cut back on luxury purchases – another issue that can be traced back to the effect of sanctions.
"Most of the famous maison holders that I know are either single or widowed ladies who are doing this business to support themselves," says Neda, who sings and plays the tambour in a traditional music ensemble. She is a client of the Ferdows Collection, whose proprietor, Narciss Akbary, makes clothing in a style that melds modern bohemian and traditional eastern, in vogue among Tehran's monied intellectuals and artists. Her collection, which she both designs and produces in India, features bright tunics, long dresses, harem pants, and scarves adorned with Indian prints.
For the last five months, Akbary has sold her Ferdows line out of a branded boutique located in northern Tehran's Alborz Mall. The mall is currently being remodeled, and Akbary's store is one of just a few that remains open on its upper level. She plans to temporarily move her sales operation back home, and rent a new storefront once the mall starts filling up again. Having previously sold out of her home for about eight years, she still appreciates the advantages of operating in a private residence.
"The house has no problems," she says. "In Iran, people really like to socialise. When you go to a store, you have to buy something and leave and you can't socialise. When you go to a home, you can drink tea, eat your pastry, and talk to your friend. It's cooler in temperature. They can take off their headscarf, look at the clothes, buy some clothes, and it's very fun."
Fashion week is one of those things that completely dominates your life for eight weeks of every year. (That's four cities, twice around, in spring and autumn.) Or else it catches your eye from the middle shelf of your supermarket's print section every once in a while.
If you're a fashion journalist or designer, chances are you've been living on instant ramen and Alka-Seltzer for the past month, observing "momentous" shifts. If you're anybody else, absolutely nothing has changed. There's a disconnect between real time and fashion time that makes it difficult for things that might seem fantastically controversial during fashion week to cross over into the mainstream.
To the fashion press, Marc Jacobs dressing Cara Delevingne and Georgia Jagger in flat shoes with thick, straw-coloured bobbed wigs was a pivotal moment in New York this season. To the rest of the world, it was a couple of people with scarecrow hair.
I'm sure you get the point. It's hard for fashion to hold people's attention for longer than the 15 seconds it takes to describe what Victoria Beckham wore to dinner with Karl Lagerfeld last night. Of course, we've learned to acknowledge the economic importance of fashion. Because, while the manic month of shows is about as familiar to most of us as the idea of buying a Saint Laurent tube dress for £1,500, the fashion industry is a behemoth of employment.
We're also learning about the importance of the representation of women in the industry. There is still a distinct lack of diversity – from the high street right up to the shows. White models outnumber all other ethnicities combined. And the line that fashion is for thin people might be the most tired of cliches, but that doesn't stop it from being 100% accurate.
Fashion is certainly a wonderful expression of art and culture and anyone who brushes it off as entirely shallow or frivolous is missing the point – but inclusive and accessible it is not.
Which is why those with a keen interest in the industry become especially alert when fashion stories go mainstream. And those moments are, more often than not, to do with issues of female representation. Heroin chic is an obvious example, which directed the public's gaze to the protruding ribs of its fashion icons. John Galliano's antisemitic rant was another. In fact, anorexia, drugs and racism are the three main reasons my dad might call me up to inquire nervously whether I really think it's a good idea to aspire to being a fashion editor.
Sure, it can be a pretty cruel world. Which is probably why nobody was particularly surprised to see Femen, the feminist protest group, storming the catwalk at Nina Ricci in Paris on Friday, chests daubed with the messages: "Model don't go to brothel" and "Fashion Dictaterror".
It's not hard to see how Femen would come to the conclusion that the fashion industry is a hostile, intolerant place; and, in the past few years, there has been some pretty depressing coverage of just how bad it can be. The recent documentary, Girl Model, featuring 13-year-old girls scouted in Siberia and sent to Japan where they're swindled into running up huge debts by agencies, isn't a particularly reassuring snapshot of the modelling world. The fact that so many of these young girls are forced into the sex trade because they're left to fend for themselves, broke in a country where they can't even read the road signs, is certainly good reason to highlight unhealthy attitudes towards women.
In this case, though, I'm not entirely convinced at how effective the stunt will be. Femen's argument that a sexualised and aggressively sexist media are consistently undermining genuine female beauty and femininity is incredibly important. The problem is: Femen's tried-and-tested methods will not force much of a shift in established assumptions.
The world already looks at the fashion industry with mixed feelings of bemusement, if not distaste. Images of Femen storming a runway surrounded by bored, uncomfortable journalists don't really scream anything other than: just how fired is that PR company going to be, the one that accidentally let the protesters in?
If you really want to make a clear statement about issues in the industry, you need to pick up the tools being used against women and work with them constructively. This is precisely what Rick Owens did at his Paris fashion week show, when he decided to design for – and present his collection with – a team of athletes from across the US. Futuristic sportswear in black, white and tan did not hang off teenagers, but was worn by healthy, powerful and ethnically diverse women, working together in performance.
Perhaps this, much more than any stunt, is the most important moment of the season and a significant landmark in fashion history. Owens didn't just decide to court controversy by inviting a few "out of the ordinary" models to parade down his catwalk. In any case, we are now inured to the sight of the odd anomaly or two. Instead, Owens designed clothes specifically to fit and complement this powerful group of women.
Managing to draw issues of female representation in fashion to the forefront of people's minds with art and performance, and on the back of his entire reputation, is hugely brave and hugely effective. Anna Wintour once said that "fashion reflects the times just as much as a headline in a newspaper". Femen's objective of just making headlines misses the point; it was Rick Owens who so successfully reflected a serious cultural issue in his work.
Which is why I'll be wearing Rick Owens for the foreseeable future. Though when I say wear, I am using that term very loosely. (Have you seen the prices?) Why don't we just channel Owens instead? After all, who doesn't have a pair of trainers and a scowl knocking around at the back of their wardrobe?
To the list of ambitious names hoping to make an impact at the Conservative party conference, add a few more: those of LK Bennett, Reiss and Jigsaw.
The past five years have seen a startling surge of interest in the clothes worn by female politicians and the wives of male politicians, driven in part by the stardust around the stylish and daring wardrobe of Michelle Obama. The phenomenon is at its height during party conference season, when speeches and staged family photocalls are now seen as fair game for fashion critique.
For a certain type of fashion label – smart but not showy; age-appropriate for the working fortysomething woman; carefully shaped for enough vim to work on camera but never too short, tight or revealing – party conference season has become a catwalk. Stores that have little hope of dressing Cara Delevingne for a night at The Box have found more modestly lucrative mannequins in Samantha Cameron and her fellow women in the political class, as they smile for their windswept annual autumn photocalls.
LK Bennett, long best known as a destination for pretty-but-practical shoes, is the name to watch this conference season. Justine Miliband chose a £245 LK Bennett dress to watch the leader's speech at the Labour conference on Tuesday. She acknowledged in advance her choice would be scrutinised, telling a Young Labour meeting that "If I don't say anything to you guys tonight probably all you'll know about me this year is the make of the dress I wear for Ed's speech".
A spokesman for LK Bennett confirmed on Thursday that the brand has been chosen by a number of both politicians and politicians' wives including Samantha Cameron, Sarah Brown, Theresa May and Justine Miliband. The Miliband dress, which had been available in all sizes at the beginning of the week, is now either sold out or close to sold out in most sizes, according to the company website.
The exposure could hardly come at a more useful moment for LK Bennett, whose owners are looking for a buyer willing to pay about £100 million for the business. The company began as a single shoe store in Wimbledon, opened by Linda Kristin Bennett. Since Bennett sold 70% of the brand to private equity groups in 2007, it has raised its sights. Innovations have included a more upscale Black Ribbon range, and alignments with fashionable women such as actress Rosamund Pike, who has designed handbags and starred in an advertising campaign, and fashion industry face Caroline Issa, who designed a range of shoes. But doubtless the most significant factor in the rise of LK Bennett, which saw a spike in profits to £9.3 million in the year to July 2012, has been the patronage of the Duchess of Cambridge, who is frequently photographed in the brand's beige Sledge platform courts and wore a teal dress and matching jacket by the label for the first day of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee celebrations. Her endorsements make it a safe choice for women in the political arena, who are aiming not to set trends but to win approval ratings.
Samantha Cameron has learned from experience that her outfits at party conference will be appraised by a public who care more about the price tag of an outfit than they do about its patriotic intent. Since being criticised for wearing a £749 Paul Smith dress for her first conference as the prime minister's wife in 2010, Cameron has been careful to choose high street or mid-market labels for subsequent conference appearances. Reiss and Jigsaw, whose clothes are neither offputtingly expensive nor so cheap as to raise questions about the factories in which they were made, have become Cameron favourites. During the 2011 conference she was photographed in a £75 top from Whistles with a skirt from a suit she had worn several times before worn with shoes from LK Bennett, and on several occasions in a pair of £39.99 trousers from Zara. Last autumn, she wore a £345 blue dress from Joseph – and, once again, grey LK Bennett shoes. However, the price tag can tell only half the story. At the 2009 Conservative conference she was widely applauded for an M&S dress that cost only £65. It was later revealed, it had sold out and had been made bespoke.
The rumours were true! JW Anderson has sealed a deal with the luxury powerhouse LVMH, which will see major investment for his brand and overtime for Anderson, who also becomes creative director of LVMH Spanish leather-goods brand Loewe. The investment deal had been a near-as-verified industry rumour for almost two weeks, but the Loewe job was not widely predicted – although the job was vacant following the departure of another Brit, Stuart Vevers, who moved to American brand Coach in the summer.
Coming just days after LVMH announced it is also backing the young British shoe designer Nicholas Kirkwood, the news suggests the luxury giants may be embarking on a spending spree to match the one that saw Stella McCartney and Alexander McQueen transformed into marquee names – and that, once again, London is where the fashion scouts are finding the sharpest talents.
JW Anderson – he's actually a Jonathan, although the label is affectionately-slash-immaturely dubbed J Dubz by sections of the front row – yesterday described his new backers as "the Oxford University of luxury goods". It is a telling metaphor, which reveals his ambition, and how seriously he takes the industry and his career. His rise been remarkably speedy. He is just 29, and his business (which until yesterday consisted of 14 people in a Dalston studio) has only been established for five years, but already turns a profit.
Anderson described Paris yesterday as "the most sophisticated city". He will likely feel at home when he is there for the Loewe show next season, as he has certain traits in common with other designers recently appointed to major Paris houses. Raf Simons, Hedi Slimane and now JW Anderson all began their careers as menswear designers, so they bring to Paris a new perspective on this city's love affair with femininity. They are all understated men who prefer to make their impact in the design studio – no powdered wigs or catwalk cartwheels. None live in a fashion bubble; instead they are well-read, well-informed people who bring broad-ranging cultural reference points to what they do.
The announcement adds bite to Paris fashion week, coming hours before the second show by Alexander Wang for Balenciaga. Wang has recently seen his own backers, LVMH's great rivals Kering, adopt a new rising star to their own ranks in the shape of Christopher Kane; now a new star striker wiill start for the opposing team as well. The question in Paris is, will the frisson of competition bring an extra edge to the Wang game today?
Tamara Mellon has form as a game changer. As the co-founder of Jimmy Choo she masterminded the high-heeled shoe becoming an emoticon for glamour. The name Jimmy Choo gained such totemic power that the spending of a month's rent on the firm's footwear could became a rite of passage for the newly independent young woman.
Mellon, having served out the gardening leave which followed her selling her stake in the company for a reported payout of $135m, is launching what she believes to be an equally agenda-setting brand at Paris fashion week.
The Tamara Mellon brand intends to steal a march on luxury competitors by challenging an illogical retail timetable which, Mellon believes, is confusing and offputting to shoppers.
Fallout from a decade of racing to beat competitors to first deliveries, and to provide "newness" on the shopfloor, has caused clothes on the shopfloor to be out of kilter with the weather, with coats on sale in July and summer shorts available in January.
At her seventh floor design studio in Paris on Wednesday, Mellon was examining a cream cashmere tunic and thigh-length ivory leather boots, which will go on sale in January.
"Our January/February collection will sell the clothes you want to wear in those months. I don't believe women want to buy sun dresses in January. And now that catwalk shows are online instantly, women aren't excited by the trends if it takes six months for them to reach stores. The consumer is way ahead of the industry here, and the industry needs to catch up."
Another early adopter of the seasonless, buy-now-wear-now, wardrobe is Stefano Pilati, the former YSL designer, who has instigated a similar approach at the Agnona label.
Mellon believes it was the pioneering business model, rather than simply the shoes themselves, which drove the success of Jimmy Choo. "That was a time when fashion magazines were realising that if they put a celebrity on the cover, it sold more – so I took that principle and applied it to what we did."
Jimmy Choo, the first British brand to set up a suite at the Oscars, quickly gained cachet as a brand associated with the red carpet.
The publication of Mellon's autobiography happens next week. The book gives her version of the power struggles which went on within Jimmy Choo. Mellon, who considers herself a feminist, says she wanted to "encourage young women to find their voice, to value themselves more highly, and to speak up in the workplace".
The higher profile of fashion in popular culture has had an impact on the exhibitions favoured by museums. Shows such as the McQueen blockbuster at the Met have attracted record audiences due to the rise of interest in, and knowledge about, fashion among the public.
Olivier Saillard, director of the Musée Galliera, in Paris, recently told the New York Times that the success was because everyone felt "free to visit fashion museums".
The latest fashiondesigner to be awarded the honour of an exhibition is Dries Van Noten, who created the collection shown on his Paris catwalk on Wedndesday while preparing for an exhibition at Les Arts Decoratifs in the city next year.
This exhibition will honour the under-the-radar influence of a designer who brings a matchless taste level to the process of mixing influences – feminine with masculine, modern with traditional.
After a catwalk show which mixed crisp poplin with gold lamé snake print accordion pleats and ethnic carpet bags, Van Noten said he wanted "to take very feminine elements and see how far I could push them, that they would still be believable garments for modern women, strong women".
The venue for the Dries Van Noten show was a vast warehouse, one long wall of which was lined with bleachers for the audience, the facing wall veiled by a zig zag of Venetian-slatted screens in lustrous gold.
To accompany a show which the designer billed as "brittle yet tenacious" and "culturally informed", Colin Greenwood, of Radiohead, wearing what appeared to be Dad Jeans, played the bass guitar in the middle of the space, while the models stalked past in Japanese-style cork flatforms, or chunky sandals in cardinal red leather.
The musical accompaniment was a very Van Noten touch: eccentric but not silly, notable rather than fancy, it brought a masculine element into the feminine space of a catwalk awash with Fortuny pleats – where one dress alone used 16 metres of ruffled, tissue-thin silk.
Workers making clothes for Lidl, H&M and Gap in Bangladesh are working excessive overtime, with some toiling for more than 15 hours a day, a BBC investigation claimed on Monday.
Panorama's Dying for a Bargain secretly filmed workers making clothes for the supermarket Lidl, who were locked inside a factory in the middle of the night. Having started work at 7am, they were not let out until 2.30am the next day.
At a factory producing clothing for retailers Gap and H&M, the working day sometimes started at 7am and finished at 10.30pm, but not all of the overtime hours were shown on the workers' payslips.
Lidl said the programme's findings were "concerning" and it was investing in improving conditions in Bangladesh.
The factory said that a second gate in the building was open and that the programme's allegations about false time sheets being shown to western buyers were "false and baseless".
H&M said that overtime "remains a major challenge in the garment industry". It said it monitors overtime at its factories by checking documentation and interviewing workers. The factory did admit it used two sets of books relating to overtime but insisted workers were not forced to work long hours.
Gap said suppliers were required to comply with its code of conduct and its clothes made up less than 5% of the output of the factory filmed by Panorama. It has no plans to place further orders with the factory.
She may have learned her trade at the cheap warehouse store Matalan, but Maxine Hargreaves-Adams has certainly moved up the fashion food chain: in the space of 18 months she has bought two designer labels. While other fashionistas fight for seats at this week's catwalk shows in London, Hargreaves-Adams is putting together plans for the revival of British labels Nicole Farhi and Fenn Wright Manson.
The Monaco resident, whose billionaire father John Hargreaves founded Matalan, says the brands have an "exciting opportunity to evolve", and has put international expansion high on her agenda.
The two labels, which are largely focused on understated British style in natural fabrics, may seem an odd choice for a jet-setting friend of royalty whom former colleagues describe as "very glamorous – all bling, big rings and jewellery". The mother-of-three scoots around in her private jet and likes to practise yoga and keep fit, but Hargreaves-Adams must now shape up two ailing brands as well as nurture Damsel in a Dress, the mid-market fashion label she has also invested in.
Hargreaves-Adams has pumped more than £5.4m of her own money into Farhi and Fenn Wright Manson, both of which were in administration when she stepped in. She believes they have appeal in the fast-developing Asian market if they can be tweaked to suit the right kind of shopper. She also intends to increase the volume of products sold online.
Hargreaves-Adams started work in the clothing industry as a Saturday girl in one of her dad's stores aged 14. She went on to run her own boutique in upmarket Southport in Merseyside for a couple of years in the 1980s, before being appointed head of womenswear at Matalan in the late 1990s. She reckons that CV has given her the experience to turn the companies around.
"Starting at the bottom, I feel my experience is very broad. I have covered so many specific areas that I can really contribute to growing these businesses from the core," she says. Nevertheless, running her own business is "scary" and she believes women still have to work harder than men to prove themselves.
But she likes being in the driving seat: "Running your own business is empowering in that you are ultimately making the decisions, [but] you have to be pretty confident that you are capable."
Industry observers seem to think that she is. "She likes a laugh and a joke but she's a Liverpudlian. She's hard as nails," one source told Retail Week magazine.
While some former colleagues suggest Hargreaves-Adams has lost touch with ordinary women given her super-rich lifestyle, she herself says she is still down to earth and approachable: "I am ego-free and I will listen to advice, but I don't feel duty bound to follow it."
Its hard to gauge the real Hargreaves-Adams, as she insisted this interview be carried out via email so that her words could be checked. It all seems rather precious: but having been chased by the tabloids following rumours of a close friendship with Prince Andrew after separating from her husband six years ago, perhaps it's no surprise that she is cautious.
It is a trait she may have inherited from her father – whom she unsurprisingly rates as her biggest influence – as he is also intensely private.
"To witness him in action is awe-inspiring," she says. "He had a vision that no one in the UK had at the time and he brought that vision to life."
The eldest of three children, she was born while her dad was still running a market stall in Liverpool. He set up a business named Jaymax, named after his two eldest children, before being inspired by a trip to the US to set up Matalan, an out-of-town discount chain, in 1985. It was indeed a brave move – out-of-town was not yet in fashion.
Maxine was educated at the local Maghull high school in Merseyside and left early, just like her father, to join the family business. While she is no longer involved with Matalan, brother Jason recently became chief executive of the retailer, which was listed on the London Stock Exchange for several years before being bought back by Hargreaves senior in 2006 for £817m.
It remains to be seen if Hargreaves-Adams can follow her father's success by turning around her new fashion labels. She certainly has her work cut out.
Nicole Farhi collapsed into administration with £20m in debts earlier this year after passing through several private equity owners since its sale by former parent company French Connection in 2010. While it appeared during London Fashion Week in the spring, the label's finances suffered after losing its founding designer in a tough market.
Hargreaves-Adams has taken on six of its stores, including the flagship branch in Mayfair in central London, as well as concessions in Harvey Nichols, House of Fraser and Selfridges. She added those to eight Fenn Wright Manson stores and a string of John Lewis concessions that she also bought from administrators, saying she wanted to honour a heritage of "stylish pieces with exceptional quality".
She says of the two labels: "The potential is in giving them back an identity which they've lost." Whether that involves adding a little of her trademark bling remains to be seen.
"British customers are among the most discerning and stylish in the world," says Tom Ford of his investment in a London store which opens this weekend.
Ford is not alone in this view. London fashion week will also see the opening, or upgraded reopening, of new landmark boutiques for Belstaff, Alexander McQueen, Longchamp and Paul Smith.
The trend for retail muscle-flexing on Bond Street, Sloane Street and Regent Street reflects a resurgence of self-confidence in the British fashion industry, as well as the nascent economic upturn. British Fashion Council chief executive Caroline Rush believes that they are "a great signifier for London. British and international brands now consider London the go-to destination for fashion."
Bond Street will be closed to traffic on Saturday evening for a motorbike parade celebrating the opening of the Belstaff store. Harry Slatkin, vice-chairman and chief executive of Belstaff – the recently revived British luxury label whose motorcycle jackets have been worn by Hollywood stars from Steve McQueen to Johnny Depp – said this week that he "wants the British Fashion Council to know that we are committed to helping establish London as a major fashion capital".
In fact, the style and ambition of the new retail palaces suggest London is already secure in its status in the fashion world.
Sarah Burton will unveil the first new look for an Alexander McQueen store since she took over on the death of the designer. In the store, moulded plaster panels feature wings, shells, cactus flowers, mushroom gills, seahorse tails and the skulls that are a house motif. The velvet sofas feature solid bronze animal feet: gazelle hooves and monster claws.
"It's very McQueen to see something from a distance and think it's one thing and then to look up close and discover something else," said Burton of the design. At Paul Smith's new Mayfair store, a trio of small drawings by Smith are cast into the facade's iron panels. "We talked about the element of surprise always found in Paul's clothes," said architects 6A of the project.
Tom Ford, legendary for his insistence on 360-degree control over every element of his company and brand, has devised the ultimate finishing touch: a perfume specifically created for the store. Private Blend London is described as a "rich and spiced, woody animalic fragrances [which] captures London's cultural vibrancy and unique dynamic between elegant, urbane composure and sometimes scandalous carnal amusements."
Further to your article (Bangladeshi union chief brings living wage campaign to London Fashion Week, 6 September) we also need to make sure that public bodies source their goods ethically. I was honoured to welcome Amirul Amin, president of the National Garment Workers' Federation in Bangladesh, to London's City Hall. We spoke about the key importance of getting British retailers signed up to the IndustriALL accord on improving fire and building safety. In July we passed a motion in the London assembly calling on the mayor to only use suppliers signed up to the accord. When you consider the buying power of Transport for London, the Metropolitan Police and the other bodies making up the Greater London Authority, it is clear that the mayor needs to sign up.
The tragedy at Rana Plaza has shown the world how important it is to be aware of the consequences of what we buy and where we buy it. This devastating event has thrown the spotlight on to British clothing and retail companies to ensure people making their clothes are able to do so in safety and dignity. Amirul Amin's visit helped to highlight the pressure of consumer and political opinion which can help to influence progress in these areas.
Amin Amirul and the NGWF are leading the struggle against sweatshop conditions and for the rights of garment workers. We must all stand together and make sure that the clothes we buy ourselves, and that are bought using our taxpayers' money, are not made in squalid conditions that force people to risk their lives. We wouldn't put up with it, so why should we expect others to?
John Biggs AM
Labour, City and East London
There is a long-held view, encouraged by the airbrush, that beauty has to be flawless. But the latest round of fashion weeks, which began in New York last week, is already showing a distinct trend towards a new type of model good looks.
Quirky, it seems, is chic. Perfection is out and kooky is in, say observers, and to stand out on the catwalk now you need more than a conventionally pretty face and a stick-thin physique.
Companies ranging from Alexander McQueen and Yves Saint Laurent to M&S and Debenhams are choosing to work with models who are quirkier, curvier, older and more racially diverse. And London is leading the way for change before the capital's fashion week, which begins on 13 September.
Perhaps led by street fashion and the ever-growing success of fashion bloggers, who have been pushing back to the art-student-meets-festivalgoer look for some time, designers are following suit and demanding quirky models to showcase their clothes.
Caryn Franklin, co-founder of the fashion diversity campaign All Walks Beyond the Catwalk, thinks women are fed up with the uniform look. "Women are now looking for fashion role models with attitude, flair and individuality. They want more personality and a version of femininity that has more attitude," she said. "We have had the classic docile, obedient, feminine look and we are all sick to the back teeth of it."
Some of the most successful models of the moment have unconventional charms. For Cara Delevingne, it's thick eyebrows, pulling funny faces and doing the Harlem Shake. Georgia Jagger's gap teeth are her signature asset, and her profile is helped in no small way by her rock star heritage. Odd hair colours and styles are more and more acceptable, while style role models include the far-from-bland Chloe Sevigny and Alexa Chung. No one "wants the cookie-cutter model" anymore, according to one Los Angeles makeup artist.
Since the supermodels of the 90s – the likes of Elle Macpherson and Claudia Schiffer – retired their bronzed Amazonian limbs, the favoured look has been vacant and waif-like: an ethereal type, easily made bland and identikit for the catwalk after hair and makeup.
But now the fashion industry is making the most of the Far Eastern market and there are lots more Asian women on the runways. Ming Xi, Xiao Wen Ju and Soo Joo are the faces everyone wants to shoot and slightly curvier models such as Kate Upton are occasionally appearing in place of the typical edge-of-starvation look.
"Whether you're a consumer or a model, a style blogger or a front-row figure, being individual is now integral to the industry," said Hannah Almassi, fashion editor of Grazia. "Years of mass production and copycat trends have created a huge yearning for truly personal style and looks, without the boundaries of supposed perfection."
Displaying other talents, or having a unique selling point – whether that means being kooky and cute, showing a rare openness on social media like Delevingne, or taking on a different persona outside of modelling, such as Jourdan Dunn and her baking – helps audiences around the globe to connect, encouraging brands and designers to seek out and employ these women.
"Social media gives them a much better space in which to operate, using short sentences, fun, catchy, interactive and conversational moments – and they still don't have to use their voice," said Franklin, who has been in the industry for over 30 years. "Delevingne has done it with a variety of silly faces – and everyone has adored it."
Tumblr-loving runway model Kelly Mittendorf is trading on her unique look and rising star Lily McMenamy, the daughter of supermodel Kristen McMenamy, is gaining recognition for her Beetlejuice-inspired style. The trend is such that even traditional beauties are trying to jump on the bandwagon – deliberately changing their looks to make themselves stand out. Burberry model Edie Campbell recently underwent a drastic makeover, trading her long brown hair for a dyed-black mullet, and 31-year-old US model Erin Wasson has numerous tattoos.
London stylist Pandora Lennard has set up an agency to cater for this demand. Anti-Agency looks for women who have talent, style and presence rather than perfect good looks.
"The casting of these 'antimodels' is a great way to convey the mood and inspiration behind a collection," said Almassi. "It's much more effective than just clothes, hair, makeup and music, as it's not just about how they look, but who they really are. Using different-looking people in campaigns and shows can bring people a step closer to the core ethos of a brand. Diesel are great at this. Their current Reboot campaign features a line-up of characters with interesting background, skills and cool personal style to boot."
Opting for alternative models is not a new idea. In the 80s, many models had an effortless confidence and energy, and designers such as Giles Deacon and Jean-Paul Gaultier have been known for street casting and unexpected choices for a long time. Sophie Dahl and Kate Moss made headlines for breaking the mould. But the idea is becoming more mainstream, and it is growing.
Sarah Raphael, deputy editor of i-D, which gave Moss her first cover, thinks it is still a slow process. "Most models remain of the 5-foot-10, size-nothing variety, but they are certainly more diverse now than ever before and fashion's idea of beauty has definitely expanded," she said.
"There are still typically 'pretty' girls – and there always will be – but for i-D, anyway, a girl with a really different, interesting and unconventional face is the one that gets us really excited."
"So, where are you sitting?" asks the fashion editor.
"Oh, ummm," murmurs the non-fashion editor, scowling at their ticket, as if it is the first time they have given the matter any thought, any thought at all. "I think I'm in, er, the fifth row."
"Right. I'm in the front row," comes the breezy response. "Meet after the show?"
This seemingly innocuous exchange is the traditional precursor to every fashion show, between fashion editors and their underlings, between underlings and their underlings, and even between genuine friends, and it is one fraught with ulterior meaning. "Where are you sitting?" is easily the most asked question during the season, beating even "Where did you buy that?" and "Did you get a discount?" This is because it is not a question: it is a statement of importance and a means of humiliating others. What the above exchange really means, when translated from fashionese, is:
"So, how important are you?"
Thanks to films such as The Devil Wears Prada and Prêt-à-Porter, even people outside the fashion world are vaguely aware of the importance placed on the front row. But because both of those films were terrible and written by people who had apparently never been to a fashion show, they didn't really explain why that is, how it works, and what it feels like to be cast out from the front row. Now I have been to many fashion shows, and I have been cast out many times, so I can probably elucidate this issue better than Meryl Streep and Anne Hathaway.
As with most things in the fashion world, the issue is simultaneously extremely superficial while having a hint of a useful function. The seating is planned by a designer's publicist and it is as hierarchical as the most feudal of medieval courts. The row in which you are placed is a public statement, to you as well as to your colleagues, of how important the designer thinks you and your publication are. Thus, the front row is reserved for the most important fashion editors (US Vogue's Anna Wintour, the New York Times's Cathy Horyn, the International Herald Tribune's Suzy Menkes, British Vogue's Alexandra Shulman) and, of course, the celebrities. Second row is for the slightly less important, such as newspaper fashion editors, deputy editors of international fashion magazines and the celebrities' partners and children (kids are cute and all but they don't deserve valuable front-row real estate). Third row is for fashion deputies and high-profile stylists. Fourth row and beyond is pretty much fashion Siberia.
I spent more than eight years covering fashion shows for the Guardian, meaning I spent 12 weeks a year, or 96 weeks of my life, dealing with the whole "So … where are you sitting?" issue. I have seen 30-year-old women screaming at hapless publicists because their ticket has "row 3" written on it. I have seen 40-year-old men refuse to attend a show because they are not in the front row – even though their publication has spent money flying them to Milan specifically to attend that show. I have seen hugely respected editors lie and pretend they lost their ticket but yes, honestly, that girl over there told them to sit in the front row.
Then there's the obnoxiousness of those who do have front-row tickets. As they take their seat, they gloat with the self-conscious pride of those who turn left to sit in first class on a plane. They'll often stand in front of their seat for as long as possible, pretending to talk to passersby. Some "frow-ers", as the blogs refer to them (nobody in the front row would stoop to using this term themselves), will make a big deal about having to turn in their seats to talk to their underlings; others will suddenly develop blindness to anyone who is not further down the row.
As I said, there is a point to all this, the point being that editors are desperately fighting for reassurance that their publication still matters, even as the publishing industry collapses around them; which seat they are given has become the easiest way to get that. But as I also said, there is a truckload of superficiality and ego going on, too.
It's easy to mock this kind of behaviour and for years, I did, from my seat in the seventh row. Honestly, all this fuss over a chair? Tchuh. Thank goodness I was so grounded, I preened. But slowly, over the years, the people who fixed the seating began to accept that maybe I wasn't Jess Cartner-Morley's charity case and moved me up the rows. One year I crossed the fourth-row boundary. The next year I was deemed worthy of the second row. And then, after eight years, I opened my fashion show tickets and saw the magical words: "Row 1".
"So," I said, turning to my colleague and friend with a glittering smile, "where are you sitting?"
When I started in the late 60s, I worked as an assistant to John French and he used to send us to all the fashion shows. I was 19 or 20 and it was incredibly boring – we used to take turns nudging each other to try to stay awake. The early ones had about 350 frocks, with girls holding up numbers [so buyers could identify the outfit]. Fashion shows weren't meant to be entertaining then.
I went to Paris, London and Rome. Paris was more serious. In London, it was younger. I went to Mary Quant's – which is the only one I remember having music – because I was with Jean [Shrimpton] at the time and she was in the show. That was unusual. Back then, different girls did shows and photography. There was a snobbery towards the catwalk models and they got paid peanuts compared with the photographic models. Quant was one of the first to change that.
I first saw Saint Laurent's work when he was at Dior, and it knocked me out. I thought he was the best – well, he was the best. He was about style rather than fashion. I was never that enamoured with fashion – I did it because it was the only way to be creative – but Saint Laurent you could wear for ever. Chanel was good, too – I went to those shows because I used to shoot the collection for American Vogue.
The only people that I would have known at a show like this would have been [Diana] Vreeland [Vogue's editor-in-chief], Alexander Liberman [editorial director of Condé Nast], maybe [the photographer Richard] Avedon. There wouldn't have been many celebrities. I wasn't really a party person, so I never did all that backstage stuff. I did go to some elegant American Vogue dinners in Paris and sometimes Yves would have a dinner at his house, which was great; his house was amazing. I think he let me shoot there later with Grace Coddington, who was then the fashion editor of British Vogue.
I went to fewer and fewer shows as the 60s went on. The only ones I have gone to regularly since then were John Galliano's when he was at Dior – they were like theatre.
• What they listened to The Beatles, the Stones, Motown.
• Where they partied The Flamingo Club.
Ossie's shows were thrilling events. The show started really late – a very 70s thing, I guess – it was like a happening, really. There was always a celebration afterwards. It was a bit chaotic and unpredictable, but all the better for it. Ossie insisted on music. He was always bringing home LPs and playing them very loudly [Clark and Birtwell were married from 1969 to 1974]. A bit of a rock star himself, he hung around with the Stones and the Beatles. They might well have been at this show. Anyone who was anyone would have been there.
Shows that I went to before this were stiff and formal affairs. This was a very relaxed period. We were all quite naive. Selling was not high on the agenda. It was about showing off with beautiful girls. The models wouldn't walk down the runway – they would dance, cavort. I can't remember the name of the girl in this picture but he always used the same models – Pattie Boyd, Amanda Lear.
The designs were about freedom after the cotton poplin of the early 60s. I worked on the prints here. There were trellises with Michaelmas daisies and a patchwork. Working with Ossie, I would print on different fabrics – chiffon, crêpe de chine, jersey – and give them to him and let him choose. We wouldn't speak much about it but I would often go into the studio when he was designing and watch the design grow, so I would have already seen these dresses.
I have not been to many fashion shows other than Ossie's. I always go to the [Central] St Martins one now, because my friends teach there and it reminds me of fashion as something about talent, not just money. I like the craziness, that it's all quite unwearable. The ideas are there and there's something bohemian about that.
• What they listened to The Stones, Elton John, David Bowie.
This was a charity fashion show, with clothes by Emanuel [husband and wife David and Elizabeth Emanuel]. At that time, they could pull this kind of crowd: Ringo Starr and his wife Barbara Bach, Olivia Harrison. It's very London. I doubt you would have Michael Aspel on the front row at Saint Laurent in Paris, but he was big on TV then. Sara Giles, sitting next to me, was a fashion editor at Tatler.
The music might have been Vangelis, the composer of Chariots Of Fire. He was a good friend of Elizabeth Emanuel. They worked with Mike Batt as well; he did classical music but also wrote the theme to the Wombles.
The Emanuels made their name designing Princess Diana's wedding dress. That was their look – pretty, floaty ballgowns. I mean, who has a ballgown in their closet these days? I remember my clothes by the men I was going out with at the time. The dress I'm wearing here was after I left [David] Bailey [to whom Helvin was married until 1983]. I was with Mark [Shand, the travel writer] at this point. I designed it and got my friend Nadia Lavelle, who owned the store Spaghetti, to make it with me.
The 80s were all about money. Power and money were the most important thing and that was exciting to be around. I don't think that the clothes were particularly fantastic, though.
I never liked going to fashion shows. I did lots of runway shows as a model and I liked the attention when I was working, but not when I was sitting watching. I was never able to enjoy myself with a camera in my face. The only time I liked it was when I was paid. Designers used to do that, especially in Italy, but once I got flown to Japan first-class for two days just to go to a show. You could also pick out any pieces you wanted from the collection. It wasn't just me doing it – girls were being flown all over the world.
I haven't been to a show in years, but the best one I saw was the Alexander McQueen show where the models walked on water [spring/summer 1997]. Isabella Blow gave me and Jerry [Hall] tickets and I  was so glad I forced myself to go. It was just unbelievable. That was the beginning of fashion shows as spectacle. Before then, it had been straight runway.
• What they listened to Wham!, Bananarama, Prince.
I went to a lot of fashion shows in the 90s, but this Versace show in 1997 was the most memorable. Everyone was there – Liz Hurley, Hugh Grant, Courtney Love. I had my mouth wide open throughout. They sent a private jet and when I got to Milan I didn't even have to walk through customs. I stayed at the Four Seasons and there was a dressmaker in my room with a rail of clothes. I chose a grey dress. They usually give you stuff to wear – if you look at pictures of the front row now, people are all wearing clothes by the designer they're watching.
They think about the seating plan and always sit you next to someone you know, which is good. I wouldn't want to sit next to a complete stranger. I went to a lot of shows with my friend [party organiser] Fran Cutler at the time – particularly Stella McCartney. I enjoyed going to them because I was this little girl from Norfolk who was passionate about fashion. I worked at Joseph as manager but I would eat beans on toast for two months to save for one piece of clothing.
I went to all of John Galliano's, until I worked for Peta [Matthews is celebrity liaison officer for the animal rights organisation], then the fur got to me. I went to Dior and Alexander McQueen as well. They were the best two designers of their generation and they had me front row, but Closer magazine was always dissing my outfit. I hated every minute of the paparazzi part of it, when you arrive at the shows and 40 people are shouting your name. It's daunting.
If a really good friend like Jasper Conran or Vivienne Westwood asks me now, then I'll go, but my priorities have changed. Anais [Matthews' daughter with Noel Gallagher] is signed as a model but she's not walking down a catwalk any time soon – she's 13. She was front row at Moschino in February, but she did the shows with me when she was little. She went to the Dior show at Versailles when she was five, but she doesn't care. She was just with her mum; she could have been sitting anywhere.
• What they listened to Blur, Pulp, the Small Faces.
• Where they partied: the Met Bar.
When I first started going to shows in Paris, I remember waiting outside, not getting in, and then the standing tickets when I was still an assistant. It was so exciting. I remember a Gaultier show where people outside were desperate to get in. They were fighting, like it was a Rolling Stones concert, not a fashion show. I think about that now when I do 11 shows in one day.
This was while I was still working at Vogue Paris [Roitfeld was the editor-in-chief of the magazine from 2001 to 2011]. Now I sit with the American press [Roitfeld edits CR, a magazine based in New York], so I have a totally different view of the show. They rarely start on time, so you're used to being late. Marc Jacobs is the only one where it's a bit stressful. He has started on the dot since he had a very late show in 2007.
Celebrities have been there since I started going to shows. It makes things more fun. I met Eva Mendes [pictured here to the left of Roitfeld] and we got on very well. They are like oxygen – they bring energy.
The number of bloggers really grew in this decade. It means a bit of a routine before you go in. It's a bit sad because that has become more important than the show, but it's best to enjoy it and smile. They're working hard outside, sometimes in the rain, to get their picture.
You don't have to wear heels on the front row, but people see the shoes first so you have to think about them. A pair of high heels gives you attitude. I wear them so much they are like part of my leg. Otherwise, I keep my uniform simple – a pencil skirt, a jumper – it's a kind of armour.
I am leaving to go on the latest round of shows. I will be on the road for two weeks but I pack light – I only have two bags. I have family and friends all over the world so I get to see Tom Ford in London, my kids in New York.
• What they listened to The Neptunes, Razorlight, Destiny's Child.
• Where they partied Fabric.
• Madameoiselle C is released in cinemas 20 September and available on DVD and download from 28 October.
The first show I went to was Julien Macdonald, when I was 14 or 15. I went with my mum and remember thinking it was really cool and glamorous – I loved the power the women had as they walked. I think Naomi Campbell was in it, which was thrilling. This experience was in my head the first time I walked in a show – you're terrified but you get a rush. You finish and you want to do it again. It's really lovely when you're watching, though, because you don't have that fear.
This was my favourite Topshop show so far. I'm next to Pixie [Geldof] but Demi Lovato [the teenage pop star] is on the other side, which I didn't realise at the time. My sister is a huge One Direction fan but I chickened out of getting my picture taken with Louis Tomlinson. I have been in the industry for seven years, so I usually know quite a lot of people. Over the season, you see the same people every day which is quite comforting. You can have a laugh.
You're usually sent clothes to wear. The jacket and trousers I'm wearing here are Topshop Unique. You usually have to give everything back but I got to keep these because I did a shoot in them, too. The most amazing thing I have worn was a piece with the cone boobs and see-through sides from the Jean Paul Gaultier archive. I felt like I was the perfume bottle.
There's always a massive rush to get in. Then we cram on to these little benches and there's lots of photographs taken. My retinas are often ruined for a while – it can be really embarrassing when people think you're ignoring them but you actually can't see them. It used to terrify me. It can catch you off guard but I know what I'm in for now. You just make sure you cross your legs if you're wearing a short skirt.
I hope to go to Christopher Kane this time, and Topshop. I'd also like to go to Viktor & Rolf, Jean Paul Gaultier. The Paris fashion week shows are always something to behold. Louis Vuitton's are out of this world. But the craziest front row experience I have had was at Matthew Williamson in 2007: Prince performed and then sat down one person away from me. I had him in my line of vision for the whole show.
• What they listened to The xx, Angel Haze, Zebra Katz.
Bee Shaffer Anna Wintour's daughter and already a regular frow-er in her 20s. Will be editing one of the Vogues (French, possibly) and wearing head-to-toe vintage Oscar de la Renta with Chanel sunglasses.
Julia Restoin Roitfeld Daughter of Carine Roitfeld, the former editor of French Vogue and general fashion badass. Will be editing the most cutting-edge fashion webzine and wearing vintage Alaïa.
Margherita Missoni The youngest and very photogenic member of the Missoni tribe, Margherita is already a favourite of fashion magazines and bloggers. By 2020, she will be comfortably ensconced in her favourite front-row seat, wearing her usual uniform of hippy-chic long Missoni dresses.
Harper Beckham Harper will have reached the grand old age of nine by 2020, and already she will know the front row better than other kids her age know their dolls' house. She will, of course, be wearing her mother Victoria's new range for children but will also sport Saint Laurent, Chloé and Chanel, all designed specially for her.
Blue Ivy Carter Another youngster, Blue Ivy will be eight in 2020 but will have developed a taste for fashion that occasionally outshines even her parents. From her mother, Beyoncé, she'll know how to work big, gorgeous prints. From her father, Jay Z, she will have inherited a fearless attitude to accessorising. Expect to see her in lots of Kenzo.
Apple Martin A teenage Apple will be there to keep an eye on little Blue Ivy. Like her mother, Gwyneth Paltrow, Apple favours a mix of deeply-boring-I-mean-classic clothes from old-school designers such as Armani and Calvin Klein, mixed with decidedly more outre offerings. Her extensive wardrobe of vintage Tom Ford will be the envy of teenage bloggers around the world.
North West The daughter of Kim Kardashian and Kanye West will be the youngest member of the front row. Organisers will have to work overtime to figure out where to place little North (never near Blue Ivy or Apple), but the paparazzi coverage she brings will make her worth it. She will be wearing dresses made of diamonds, designed by her dad.
A union leader representing millions of poverty stricken Bangladeshi garment workers is to use London fashion week to confront Britain's top fashion retailers and clothing brands and urge them to support fresh demands for all employees to be paid a living wage.
Nearly five months after 1,129 people died in the collapse of the Rana Plaza factory near Dhaka, Bangladesh, Amirul Haque Amin, president of the National Garment Workers' Federation, will join forces with British union campaigners to highlight the plight of workers in the global fashion industry.
Amin, who arrives in Britain on Friday, will address delegates at the TUC's annual conference on Monday, alongside Heather Wakefield, who heads the local government service group of Britain's largest public service union, Unison. He plans to take the same message to London's high-profile annual fashion week which starts on 13 September.
The link between cheap fashion in Britain's shops and shockingly poor worker conditions was again highlighted following the collapse of the eight-storey Rana Plaza garment manufacturing building.
Amin will use his visit to persuade UK retailers to pay a wage far in excess of the £25 (3,000 taka) a month earned by the Rana Plaza workers.
He will contrast the hardship endured by millions of Bangladeshi garment workers with the multi-million pound profits accumulated by retailers such as Topshop and Tesco, which (the latter through its F & F clothing range) sponsor London fashion week.
Tesco and other leading brands, including Primark, Gap, Monsoon, Accessorize, Marks & Spencer, and Asda, belong to the Ethical Trading Initiative and have signed up to a code of conduct that includes support of a living wage. But the wage aspect, Amin will stress, has failed to materialise, and, he says, more pressure is needed.
"The Rana Plaza disaster not only exposed unsafe conditions for workers turning out British stores' clothes, but the pittance on which they struggle to survive. It is high time UK retail chains, and other companies sourcing from Bangladesh, matched ethical claims with action to lift their suppliers' workers out of poverty."
In advance of his arrival, the NGWF's partner, the charity War on Want, is publishing a report entitled The Living Wage: Winning the fight for social justice, which cites evidence that a living wage benefits workers, employers and also wider economies.
The report points to the success of the Alta Gracia factory in the Dominican Republic, reportedly the world's only supplier producing clothes for a mainstream brand that is also paying its workers a living wage.
The report comes amid news that Conservative policy advocates want David Cameron to promise a higher minimum wage during his speech at the party's conference in the coming weeks.
Labour's shadow Treasury team is considering whether to say that living wage zones would be established if they won power at the next election.
Meanwhile, War on Want is demanding full compensation in relation to the Bangladesh disaster, for victims' bereaved families and injured workers, before a two-day meeting in Geneva this week hosted by the International Labour Organisation.
More than 40 brands were linked to the Dhaka factory that collapsed, including the retailers Benetton, Matalan and Bonmarché as well as Primark.
Now, more than 50 brands have signed up to a legally binding building safety agreement backed by the international trade union IndustriALL and the Bangladeshi government. Topshop, Gap and Walmart, however, have not yet done so.
War on Want is urging the public to apply pressure on retailers over the accord and compensation.
Some BFFs are just meant to be. See Gwyneth Paltrow and Stella McCartney – the alpha beauty and the Olympic-worthy designer. Even their names – Gwenyth and Stella – trip off the tongue together, like some sort of post-Abba Scandinavian pop group ready to take over the pop charts.
Instead, it was announced today, following rumours last week, that the pair would be collaborating on a line of clothes for Paltrow's lifestyle website, Goop. Speaking to fashion website WWD, Paltrow said "we complement each other".
Launching next Friday, the result of their alliance will be perfect basics, as you might expect. "This is a big reflection of her [Paltrow's] life," says McCartney, of the range. "These designs are not going to blow anyone away. They are staple pieces." While pictures are yet to be released, items apparently include a black blazer, black jeans, a black jumpsuit and the Beckett bag in black, grey and white. Only available in the US arm of the site, prices start at around $795 (£510), so they don't come cheap, but they are about equivalent of the prices of McCartney's main line.
The precise monochrome colour palate suits brand Paltrow and will no doubt sell well with Goop-ers out to emulate their guru's life, recipes and style. The site is a place where Paltrow says she "shares life's positives", and those have included clothes for a while. She has introduced other collaborations with very Paltrow brands, ranging from cashmere from Chinti & Parker to swimwear by Melissa Odabash.
None of them has been as flawless as this, though. Paltrow has been a loyal red carpet supporter of McCartney, so the rise of the two of them is already linked and associated with a glossy, if slightly control freaky, lifestyle of quinoa on tap, a beautiful brood and having great pins over 40. Gwyneth and Stella joining forces in an official manner is like the stars aligning. You're left wondering what took them so long.
There are 565 historically, culturally, and linguistically distinct, federally recognised Native American tribes in the United States. 565 cultures routinely boiled down to a fake feather headdress or fringed t-shirt.
The fashion industry is notorious for profiting from the co-option and reproduction of cultural dress from across the globe. No culture is safe from being repackaged and sold as the latest thing. No remuneration or benefits are afforded to the communities who provide "inspiration" – communities who are often scorned for wearing ethnic items, and whose artisans struggle to make a living from authentic products.
In 2012 Urban Outfitters produced a "Navajo" range of clothes and accessories. The range had no links to Navajo designers or artisans, items merely displayed a faux tribal print. The marketing of inauthentic products using Native American tribal names is outlawed under the Indian Arts And Crafts Act. The Navajo Nation served Urban Outiftters with a cease and desist letter, highlighting their particular objection to the Navajo hip flask and the Navajo Hipster Panty which contravened their spiritual beliefs about modesty, and the reservation-wide ban on the consumption of alcohol.
Writing as a Dakota on the Racialicious website, Sasha Houston Brown, of the Santee Sioux Nation described the problem: "Urban Outfitters Inc. has taken Indigenous life ways and artistic expressions and trivialized and sexualized them for the sake of corporate profit … Just as our traditional homelands were stolen and expropriated without regard, so too has our very cultural identity."
Under pressure, Urban Outfitters removed the word Navajo from the product line but kept the items on sale. Refusing to apologise, they were sued by the Navajo Nation. Court-ordered mediation has since failed and a court case is scheduled for 2015. Urban Outfitters has also been accused by Jewish, Irish, Latino, Black, and Chinese community organisations of racist and offensive designs. No one from the Urban Outfitters London press office was available for comment.
In September 2012, Paul Frank Industries, owned by Saban Capital Group, caused similar offence when it held a fashion party with a "neon-Native American pow-wow" theme. Over 1,000 photographs were published on Facebook of revellers in glow-in-the-dark warpaint and feathered headbands with bow and arrows and toy tomahawks. Themed cocktails such as the rain dance refresher were available, and the invitation as well as a line of t-shirts both depicted the brand's mascot monkey wearing a sacred feathered headdress.
The outcry was immediate and strident. Led by Jessica Metcalfe at Beyond Buckskin and Adrienne Keene of Native Appropriations, campaigners secured the removal of the photographs from Facebook and eventually an apology from Paul Frank Industries. What happened next, however, surprised campaigners, who were used to being ignored or insulted by corporations. The president of Paul Frank Industries, Elie Dekel, wrote to both Keene and Metcalfe, asking if they would be willing to speak with him personally.
As well as apologising, Dekel seemed genuinely willing to learn. All "Native American inspired" designs and artwork were removed from the company's style guide, Keene and Metcalfe were invited to industry panels to educate manufacturers about the use of Native imagery, and Paul Frank Industries asked to collaborate with Native artists on a product range.
Dekel describes the collaboration as an opportunity to make amends and "help raise awareness about cultural misappropriations, which unfortunately happen too often in product, promotion and fashion." He hopes that the "collaboration will demonstrate more appropriate ways to engage and celebrate the Native American communities."
Four artists were chosen: Louie Gong, a designer from the Nooksack tribe, Candace Halcro, a beading artisan from the Plains Cree and Métis tribes, Dustin Martin, a graphic t-shirt designer from the Navajo tribe, and Autumn Dawn Gomez, a jewelry designer from the Comanche and Taos tribes. They are the recipients of the proceeds from the collaboration.
It is easy to be cynical about Paul Frank Industries motivations in proposing this collaboration. Yet in an industry context, they remain head and shoulders above the insult-and-run policies of other companies. If the point of a genuine apology is to ensure that mistakes are not repeated, rather than to merely excuse bad behaviour, then Paul Frank Industries have taken positive steps.
Campaigners are adamant, however, that people do not forget how this collaboration came about. Cultural appropriation remains a serious problem. It is so prevalent because it replicates colonial relationships. This means that there is no space given to Native artists to counteract racist and demeaning stereotypes that substitute for their real identity.
Far from being harmless, fake feathered headdresses represent the theft of cultural identity and lost homelands. Whilst diversity at the top levels of the fashion industry is desperately needed, it will take more than this to bring about real change. Ending cultural appropriation means overturning the power structures that it mirrors.
• This article was amended on 27 August to reflect that Sasha Houston Brown was writing as a Dakota not from Dakota.
This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Become GSB member to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Just 5% of clothing brands operating in Australia have reported efforts to ensure suppliers are paid a living wage, while only 7% have said they know the source of their cotton, a product closely associated with child labour, a new report has found.
The Australian Fashion Report, compiled by Baptist World Aid, is scathing of several major brands over their policies towards garment workers in the developing world, as well as their transparency and monitoring of standards.
Rankings of 41 companies, representing 128 brands in Australia, gave top marks only to 3Fish and Etiko, which specialise in ethically sourced clothes. Supre, David Jones, Just Group and Lacoste received poor marks. However, the report said that many of the brands in the rankings, including the ones marked down, didn't respond to requests for information.
Only 7% of the brands reported that they know where their cotton comes from, according to the report. Baptist World Aid said that cultivating cotton has a known problem with child labour, especially if sourced from Uzbekistan. Companies such as Cotton On, Puma and Target have boycotted cotton from the central Asian country.
 
"Cotton is an important one to look at due to abuses in its production," said Gershon Nimbalker, co-author of the report. "Uzbekistan is one of the worst examples as the country has a dictator that has taken hundreds of thousands of children out of school to harvest cotton in the fields in horrible conditions. He uses the money to keep the dictatorship flush with funds, so it's hugely problematic."
 
The report, which was compiled from surveys of businesses and publicly available information, found that 90% of brands had no wage guarantee throughout the supply chain and only 5% had partial safeguards in place.
 
The rankings show that very few brands scored well for worker rights, while scores for transparency and monitoring were patchy across the industry.
 
Australian retailers have come under pressure to improve supplier standards since the collapse of the Rana Plaza building in Bangladesh earlier this year, which killed more than 1,100. Several Australian firms have signed up to an international accord on worker safety.
 
However, subsequent allegations emerged of physical and verbal abuse of Bangladeshi workers making clothes for Coles, Target and Kmart.
"We know companies in Australia have done a lot of work in recent years to source ethically, but when you look further down the supply chain it's clear they simply don't know who supplies them," Nimbalker said.
 
"We would love for these businesses to look beyond their financial bottom line and look at what's creating value for workers, rather than just exploit them. It's just not an issue for them at the moment."
 
"Rana Plaza was such a vivid tragedy, but this issue isn't just limited to Bangladesh or to occupational health and safety. We want retailers to make a living wage stipulation that doesn't keep workers mired in poverty, get to know who their suppliers actually are and conduct audits."
 
Russell Zimmerman, the executive director of the Australian Retailers Association, said the industry was currently working on improving standards.
 
"We've had a lot of calls from retailers on this issue and there's a desire to ensure the supply chain is of a high ethical standard," he said. "It can be difficult in foreign countries, where there are language barriers and different regulations to those in Australia."
 
"Retailers are concerned about this issue and so, increasingly are consumers. We are working with retailers on this now, but it's important to not have a knee-jerk reaction. We want something in place that stands up to scrutiny."
J.Crew's Regent Street store might be the most anticipated shop launch ever. While the doors don't even open until November, the store unveiled a series of cabs halfway up the building to keep people interested. Multicoloured, with neon wheels, wings and baroque mouldings, they are the work of Shona Heath, fashion's set designer du jour. You've almost certainly seen her work on billboards already. Here are five things you need know about her.
Heath is known for her work with photographer Tim Walker, and considers shoots with him, making skeletons for a Tim Burton-inspired story, and props for a Vogue Roald Dahl homage, as some of her career highlights. As well as J.Crew, she has also worked with brands ranging from Miu Miu to Valentino and Louis Vuitton. "That was hardest project I worked on – making a hot-air balloon that had to fly," says Heath of the latter. "It took off from a courtyard at the Louvre."
Heath works with Andy Knight set designers in south London to create her most outlandish projects – everything from a UFO (for another Walker shoot) to the fibreglass taxis for J.Crew. "Fibreglass is horrible stuff," she says. "It's made out of this tissue-paper stuff and smells obnoxious." It's this down-and-dirty approach that appeals to Heath. "The glamorous bit is the final result but I'm not really interested in the glamour of fashion. I still don't really know when fashion week is," she says. "To make something is to give someone something they might not have seen. I design when I'm making."
"I didn't know my job existed when I started doing it," she recalls. "I was doing costumes for pop videos and decided I wanted to do backgrounds. I didn't even know it was called a set." She clearly had a talent for it, though. A Dazed & Confused fashion shoot in 2001 was swiftly followed by windows for Martine Sitbon; Heath now has so much work that all-nighters are a regular part of her schedule – J.Crew's taxis kept her up for two straight days.
Working in a small studio with a team of three people, Heath isn't a hoarder. "Props always looks nicer in pictures," she says. "I think photography adds another element to what I do because you can't see how it joins. We did a horse's head once that looked great in pictures but was crap from a certain angle. I'd rather not keep it knowing that. It's better to just remember the picture."
"I used to just turn up in my car with a glue gun and gaffer tape," she remembers. "Then there was a project where I had to paint a whole room red. A friend recommended that I work with Andy Knight – they turned up with a spray gun and did in two hours what would have taken me six days. With the knowledge you can do anything, your ideas get bigger." Post-J.Crew, Heath is working with photographers Inez and Vinoodh on the windows for New York store Barneys, which will feature a marionette of Lou Doillon, and the curators of the Isabella Blow exhibit opening at Somerset House in November. "I never met her but everyone I talk to has a little anecdote," she says. "It's really nice working on a project executed with love."
French cosmetics giant L'Oreal is making an $843m (£540m) takeover offer for skincare company Magic Holdings to help it expand in China's fast-growing beauty market.
Magic Holdings International is the "ideal fit" for L'Oreal SA's existing China business and the deal also gives Magic an "ideal partner" to expand into new markets, the companies said in a joint filing on Thursday.
Magic is the market leader in the rapidly expanding product category of facial masks, with a 26% share last year, according to AC Nielsen data.
"Facial masks are one of China's beauty market's fastest-growing areas with very promising development prospects," L'Oreal said. "L'Oreal intends to develop this Chinese brand by contributing its science-based expertise."
Emerging markets such as China have become increasingly important for the French cosmetics maker, which is trying to counter stagnant growth in its traditional markets. Last year, the Paris-based company made more money from "new markets", which include Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, Africa and eastern Europe, than from North America or western Europe.
China's economic growth has slowed from double-digit rates but remains much higher than developed economies.
The French company is offering HK$6.30 (52 pence) for each Magic share. Magic's stock price soared 18% on the Hong Kong stock exchange to HK$5.98 on Friday.
Six key shareholders who own 62.3% of Magic are already supporting the deal, which needs approval from China's ministry of commerce.
L'Oreal has 3,500 staff, a research centre and two factories in China.
Fashion attracts eccentrics – just look at the front row. Leggy It girls, tired fashion editors, drag queens in rubber and – a regular at just about every catwalk event – the Fashion Cowboy.
James Goldstein is well known among the fashion pack. A leathery skinned, frizzy haired American whose outfits pivot around a theme of python Stetson, leather trousers, cowboy boots and neckerchief, the Fashion Cowboy, as he's affectionately known, has been a show attendee for 30 years. Goldstein says he first went to a John Paul Gaultier show in the early 1980s – he goes to around 200 a year. That makes him as much of a fixture as Anna Dello Russo or Carine Roitfeld. Something of a cult figure, he has even been featured in French Vogue and been profiled in Interview magazine.
While he's certainly wealthy (just check out his house, which was designed by Tom Ford fave John Lautner) Goldstein's modus operandi at fashion week has been unclear – until now. The Fashion Cowboy is about to launch his own line. Debuting at Milan fashion week this September, Goldstein has said that it will be "a chic rock and roll line, in the same spirit as my own style". Expect leather, boots and high prices. Oh, and Goldstein wearing it on the front row sometime soon.
Oprah Winfrey is a successful billionaire with an empire worth $3bn, a woman whose public reputation has been built on self-empowerment. She has been frank about the stresses in her life – racism and sexism figure often – and about her struggles with her weight.
It is this last aspect that may be the hardest to deal with. Oprah's thyroid condition makes her weight problems unavoidable. She has to deal with the rebellion of her body. She may find sympathetic tailors and fabulous shoes, and accessorize brilliantly, but she likely knows what all women know: shop assistants won't be kind to women over a size 10, and that is especially true of woman of color.
To find something nice for Tina Turner's wedding, Oprah walked alone into Trois Pommes in Zurich last month, an upscale shop that carries clothes from the usual runway names – Celine, Jil Sander, Lanvin – and has locations in wealthy ski towns that attract billionaires: St Moritz, Gstaad, Basel.
A shop assistant refused to show Oprah a $42,000 crocodile handbag. Here is the incident in Oprah's words, via the International Business Times:
Oprah later mused to Larry King that she considered following the script of Pretty Woman and deploying her fortune by buying everything in the store, but decided not to give the saleswoman the satisfaction of a larger commission. The head of the luxury chain, Trudie Goetz, later said that the saleswoman didn't recognize Winfrey and that by rejecting Oprah's request she tried to be "too kind".
No doubt, the details of the incident will be pored over. It has already been attributed to racism, and rightfully so: Oprah's incident tripped a wire that worries many women of color: to be judged negatively and immediately by their race, to be treated as second-class citizens, to be pointed to the things that are not the best, but considered merely "good enough" for you. The best and most expensive, the implication goes, is saved for those with the obvious status markers: well-groomed, accompanied by a wealthy-looking man, and usually, not coincidentally, very thin.
This is what Oprah, and most other women, rarely talk about: the struggle for respect faced by women of color is shared, at times, with another group: women of size, another category to which Oprah belongs. The scale is not the same – racism can be as ugly as anything humans are capable of – yet, on a day-to-day basis, they have parallels. There is the same sense of diminishment, the same high-handed assumption by others, the same struggle for control of your own image.
Race is tied with socioeconomic status struggles; so is weight. There have been some studies of a link between a woman's size and her socioeconomic status, showing that women with low incomes tend to be of higher weight. There are many theories on this – because of unsocial working hours, lower availability of healthy food in poor neighborhoods, and other factors that may affect food choice and metabolism.
On the other side of the scale, anorexia and other eating disorders tend to be more common in people of higher socioeconomic status. You don't need science to tell you this: in the cold calculation of high-end fashion or jewellery or luxury bags, a woman's dress size is often assumed to be a marker of her status, as much as race is. Both indicate a certain institutional bigotry, an assumption based on outdated – and just plain wrong – cliches about what a person's bank balance looks like based on what their body looks like.
This is what most women know: when a woman walks into an upscale store, she has already been evaluated as to the size of her bank account or credit line (or whether she looks like she can attract a man with both of them). High-end shop assistants, like everyone who works on bonus, commission or by their wits – Wall Street traders and pool hustlers, for instance – are taught to size up a mark at a thousand paces. They read grooming, body language, clothing, and accessories as a sign of how likely someone may be to spend – or lose – money.
This is what that Zurich shop assistant was doing. Lacking the crucial information that Oprah was a celebrity, she relied on shallow markers: her size, her race. Even a Donna Karan dress is not enough to overcome those biases.
Oprah was looking to buy a handbag, which has no size measurements, but the product is not the point: in an upscale boutique, all buyers are judged, in part, by their weight. Many shops want the people in them to look "thin and cool", in the words of Abercrombie & Fitch's CEO. They may grudgingly sell larger sizes, but only online.
The key thing for people of any size is to remain hidden from areas where status is important. The rather unintelligent thinking seems to be that fat is infectious, or that thin people won't want products that have been merely glanced at by anyone over a size 10.
As a result, there is a kind of social segregation based on weight as well as on race. To test this, walk into any other fashionable shop in Zurich, or Gstaad, or London, or Paris, or Los Angeles, or New York: you may see women in flip-flops, women with messy ponytails, women in ripped jeans. Those are all perfectly acceptable – as long as she is also carrying an expensive handbag or accompanied by a man who looks like he has means. But you will rarely, if ever, see even a perfectly groomed, immaculately dressed woman above a size 10.
Shop assistants in upscale boutiques in fashionable areas of major cities have become practiced at hovering around ample women in a hurry to remind them:
And this size bias trickles down the economic scale: clothing retailers at all levels perpetuate the idea that carrying an extra 30lb is anti-fashion. Identifying low body weight with low status seems to infect clothing retailers from Lululemon to Abercrombie & Fitch. Last week, Lululemon said that clothes above a size 12 "are not part of its business strategy", and Abercrombie's cheerleaders-only aesthetic has become the stuff of legend. "A lot of people don't belong (in our clothes), and they can't belong," says Abercrombie CEO Mike Jeffries.
This is, of course, ridiculous. There are many reasons for a woman's weight to vary, including everything from medication to thyroid issues to stress to lifestyle. Fat-shaming, as the fashion retail industry often indulges in, is also a form of fat-blaming: it assumes that a woman's weight tells you all you need to know about her. This is irrational and, most importantly, completely false.
The common bias of tying socioeconomic status with weight is just bad business. The saleswoman who made that assumption about Oprah was wrong – and her shop not only lost a high-value customer, but is also paying a steep price in the very public wrath of a billionaire scorned. Whatever the social formula those shop assistants are using may be, it often fails to truly judge a customer's ability to spend. It was, to quote Pretty Woman, "a huge mistake".
There are women who would like to have access to upscale fashion and have the means to indulge – if only shops would recognize that high income and good credit comes in all shapes and sizes. Maybe clothing retailers should, similarly, learn that a woman's cultural, economic and social power is not solely discernible at a glance – either by her skin color or by her weight.
It might help their bottom line if they stopped judging those of others.
The Maasai represent one of the most powerful images of Africa, so it's perhaps unsurprising that companies around the world have exploited its iconic cultural brand to sell their products.
But the Maasai, 80% of whom live below the poverty line, have gained no benefit from this so far. Now they are fighting back by attempting to trademark their name and designs.
Isaac ole Tialolo, a leader and elder, who is also chair of a new organisation, the Maasai Intellectual Property Initiative (MIPI), has -- together with Washington-based Light Years IP, an NGO which specialises in securing IP rights in developing countries -- been traveling around Maasai regions In Kenya and Tanzania holding meetings and workshops.
 
If the consultation is successful, the plan is to create a general assembly of Maasai elders, trained in IP, who would act as a legal body negotiating with companies via a licensing agent, in order to enable the ethnic group to develop their economic rights.
"I think people need to understand the culture of the others and respect it," ole Tialolo told the BBC earlier this year. "You should not use it to your own benefit, leaving the community, or the owner of the culture, without anything. If you just take what belongs to somebody, and go and display it and have your fortune, then it is very wrong…very wrong."
The key issue here concerns the commercial use of cultural property and the sharing of the benefits. The Maasai initiative homepage opens with the fitting Maasai proverb, "Esuj erashe ng'ejuk emusana," which means: If an idea is good, it will be copied and followed."
According to the MIPI, the Maasai name, image and reputation is used around the world on products ranging from cars to shoes, and exercise equipment and estimates it could be worth billions of dollars over the long term.
Companies include Land Rover, which has a range of accessories under the name, speciality trainers Masai Barefoot Technology and Louis Vuitton, which has a Masai line, including beach towels, hats and scarves.
Light Years IP is involved in a small, but expanding area of development policy, known as "intellectual property value capture." It is based on the premise that more should be done to address the fact that only a small fraction of the profits made on the international market go back to the original community that helped create them.
The work with the Maasai is not the first time that an indigenous peoples has acted to protect their economic rights. The Native American Navajo recently brought a case against the clothes company Urban Outfitters, for use of their name.
Only last week, the two sides announced they have failed to reach a settlement in the federal lawsuit. Urban Outfitters has argued that "Navajo" is a generic term for a style or design and has asserted counter claims. It is seeking a declaration of non-infringement and cancellation of the tribe's federal trademark registrations.
In similar fashion, it is also uncertain whether any IP protection is available to the Maasai tribe. One alternative route to formal IP protection might be for the Maasai to set up a voluntary code to govern the use of their cultural and intellectual property.
This may turn out to be as powerful a tool as securing IP protection, as few companies will want to risk negative publicity. After all, consumers are placing greater value on corporate social responsibility and ethics, and negative publicity could cause them to further question the true cultural, social and environmental value of what they purchase.
What does this mean for ethical fashion?
In terms of the realm of ethical fashion, the Maasai case is significant because many designers are now tapping into the group's renowned beading skills for high-end jewellery design and working with the community to produce pieces that showcase their traditional techniques.
Ethical fashion initiatives such as Fashion4Development, "a global campaign that uses fashion-based initiatives to support the United Nations' wider issues in helping Africa," and the UN's International Trade Centre (ITC) Ethical Fashion Initiative, a project which connects the fashion business with African artisans, are underlining issues such as development, poverty reduction and environmental sustainability.
Top fashion brands such as British designer Vivienne Westwood, Stella McCartney, Australia's Sass and Bide and Italy's Ilaria Venturini Fendi are participating in these initiatives and working with indigenous communities to create fashion products featuring ethnic-influenced patterns, prints and designs inspired by the land and culture of the Kikuyu, Maasai, Samburu and other East African tribes.
The fashion industry has often struggled to embrace an ethical business model. This case highlights the point that working with indigenous communities requires responsibility. As UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon put it in L'Uomo Vogue's recent issue, "Rebranding Africa": "Africa does not need charity. Africa needs investment and partnership."
It's important to be aware of the risks when partnering with indigenous tribes and communities. As more companies look to the continent of Africa for inspiration, they must ensure that the these partnerships mutually benefit those communities.
Tania Phipps-Rufus is a lecturer of law at Hertfordshire University, an Ethical Fashion Forum consultant and professional fellow. She is founder of Eco Fashion Rules and currently undertaking a Ph.D. in cultural intermediation, law, sustainability and the creative industries
This week, Laura Ashley opened its first hotel. If the name, Laura Ashley The Manor, Elstree, Hertfordshire, doesn't quite trip off the tongue, the 49-bedroom mock-Tudor manor is certainly attracting attention. The company's design teams have worked on so many hotel interiors already that, according to Joint COO, Nick Kaloyirou, the project is "a natural progression, to take the brand one step further."
Fashion-branded hotels are not new. Versace opened the famously-opulent Palazzo Versace in Queensland, Australia, in 2000. Even if you couldn't contemplate couture, you could buy the jeans, and surround yourself with branded homewares on the Gold Coast.
Other Italian houses took to the idea: Bulgari, Ferragamo, Armani, Gucci, and Missoni – which has brought its signature stripes to the Royal Mile in Edinburgh. Though the most inviting, for me, are the Ferretti family's boutique offerings, Carducci 76 and Palazzo Viviani, in Emilia-Romagna. Right now, a hotel brand is clearly the thing to have. Ikea is currently working on a project with Marriott to create a budget chain called Moxy, the first of which will open in Milan.
In some ways, Laura Ashley is bringing the concept full circle, since it was a British name which did it first. Back in 1996 Mulberry founder Roger Saul opened Charlton House, a country-house hotel populated by colourful kilims, battered leather and muddy boots. It reflected perfectly his quintessentially English label.
The Manor is showcasing Laura Ashley furnishings (guests will sleep on the company's beds, read by Laura Ashley lamps and sip afternoon tea resting on its chairs) but also, importantly, reissued archive designs – some dating back to the 1950s. More brands could try this.
Imagine a night chez Liberty, or a weekend in the embrace of American clothing and hip homewares boutique Anthropologie, and little would get me packing faster than interiors outlet Baileys (the holy grail of Gloucestershire) putting its shabby-hip stamp on accommodation. Who knows who we'll be getting into bed with next. Which brands would you like to see turned into hotels – and which would you never stay in?
This year, I set myself the challenge of wearing 100% dumped, discarded or donated clothing for 365 days in a personal and professional effort to get under the skin of the problem of excessive clothing waste.
Unexpectedly, the idea for this wardrobe anarchy kicked off during the filming of an Al Jazeera news piece, called Cleaning Up Fashion's Act. I'd spent a few fun days with a crew filming in a small number of good factories in China. The factories had integrated innovative and transparent textile recycling, mainly at their client's behest. Factory-level recycling initiatives like these are to be applauded, encouraged and nurtured.
As our filming came to an end, we found ourselves on one of Hong Kong's three depressingly packed landfills. I stood perched high on top of a man-made mountain of trash, a far cry from her salubrious and better-known mountain, the Peak. Here I had a bird's eye view of the fashion industry's problem. I watched a queue of rubbish trucks locked in rush-hour-like traffic for their chance to dump into the tipping zone.
As I witnessed a fraction of the estimated 217 tonnes of textile waste being dumped into landfills every day in Hong Kong, I realised that the environmental gains made by the fashion industry's sustainability initiatives – a sprinkle of improved recycling, a dose of energy-efficiency and a dash of water savings – become lost when faced with this abyss of repugnant post-consumer textile waste. And this is how my 365-day fashion odyssey of wearing clothes fresh from the clothes recycling bin was born.
To start me off, I needed access to dumped clothes. We partnered with fellow charity, Friends of the Earth (HK), to gain access to their used clothes recycling centre, which is the temporary sorting home for clothes dumped by Hong Kong's public, the majority of which are then sold on to south-east Asian countries.
My first visit to the recycling centre (aka my new wardrobe) was a visual, sensory and fashion journey all in one. The uniquely-pongy warehouse (imagine mothballs meets meatballs) is packed with bags stuffed with dumped clothes of every size, shape and style, with previous owners ranging from old Chinese grannies, young Nigerian street vendors and well-heeled fashionistas more prone to shopping in Prada than Primark.
With the help of fashion stylists, we waded through bags that contain as many examples of why the fashion industry is in a mess as items of clothing. Clothes poorly made, badly cared for, ripped, stained, broken and downright horrible tumble from bags. But within this sorry wastage are incredible clothes, be they well known brands, high-quality fabrics and finishings, brand new, vintage or handmade, which I've then worn throughout this year to promote the "Redress it, don't' bin it" concept.
Thanks to our fashion stylists, I've been decked from head to toe in gloriously fashionable clothes, from killer suits, to high-function ski-wear, sexy swimming costumes and stylish shoes, all of which were deemed worthless by the thousands of previous owners who dumped them. To keep our sustainable message moving and to capture consumers' interest, we are focusing each month on tips and tricks to keep clothes out of landfill and in the fashion loop. Now, half way through the challenge, we have covered capsule wardrobes, durability, swapping, DIY fashion, trends, consumer care and now I am wearing the same little black dress all month, inspired by Sheena Matheiken's "Uniform Project".
This daily dressing up in other people's trash has shed professional light on the fashion industry's problem – consumers. We thoughtlessly yearn for new clothes to keep us within just a few pages of the current fashion magazines' trends. The fashion industry responds (if not yelps for joy) at our willingness to cough up cash for clothes designed for premature cardiac arrest. As a result, consumers are driving a creative, cultural and skilful industry into a cheap, chuck-away unvalued cesspit.
Put plainly, even if fashion does clean up its act, unless consumers do the same with their wardrobe habits then we're still in the same stinking situation.
Christina Dean is the founder and CEO of Redress, a Hong Kong based NGO with a mission to promote environmental sustainability in Asia's fashion industry
The autumn fashion lines from Marks & Spencer, which have been filtering into stores in the past couple of weeks and will formally launch on Thursday, are the first to be entirely guided by company's new womenswear management team.
M&S clothing and homewares sales have been drifting backwards for two years, and Marc Bolland, the chief executive, is under pressure from shareholders to show a marked improvement this autumn.
This week, in London, shoppers were divided over whether the new coats and jumpers ranges indicated improvement. There was a buzz at the firm's flagship Marble Arch store, set to display its autumn ranges, as prints, sleeve lengths and fabric quality were pondered over.
"It really doesn't look much different than before," said one shopper, Anne, who was also an M&S shareholder and regularly attendee at the retailer's annual meetings. "I do really want them to get it right. In menswear they have great tailoring of good quality made in Italy, but in womenswear the suits seem very cheap. I would spend the money for good quality."
Pat Salisbury, 66, was pleased with a sparkly tailored cardigan she had bought and liked some T-shirts with flattering mid-length sleeves. "Some of the clothes look much better, more modern, but I'm not sure about the changes to the Per Una range. They've gone away from the embroidery and beading I liked, and if I walked through the door I'm not sure I could tell it from Autograph or M&S Woman. Perhaps it's getting confused."
A number of shoppers were pleased to note signs of a move away from the "frumpy" styles they had been turned off by on previous shopping trips.
Two glamorous octogenarian sisters, Annie Redzinski and Josephine Frost, were impressed by some of the coats and tailoring. "We want to see more of this in our local store." It was a view echoed by several other shoppers.
Amanda Carr who writes The Women's Room blog for 40-something fashion fans, said M&S was doing a better job at showing customers how to build outfits andthere were signs of improvement, particularly with knitwear.
But she added: "For me there are still issues with print, colour and a tendency to overdesign which is a massive weakness. There's still a long way to go."
High street women's fashion chain Internacionale has been rescued from administration by a controversial pre-pack agreement, with 1,550 jobs saved.
The bargain retailer will continue operating 114 stores across the country, but 18 have shut, with staff given just one week's notice that they would lose their jobs.
The new business, International UK Ltd, has been bought by the previous owners for an undisclosed fee. The most recent accounts filed at Companies House show the company had £19m of debts, including a £9.4m loan from the firm's biggest investor.
The owners are former chief executive Raj Sehgal, managing director Naresh Abrol and former finance director William Milton. All three are expected to run the new company in the same positions.
It is not known how much external creditors could lose. The business filed an intention to enter administration last month, while secret negotiations took place for a pre-pack takeover.
Pre-pack administrations have been criticised in the past for not giving creditors the opportunity to be part of any behind-the-scenes talks.
Tom Jack, joint administrator for Ernst & Young,, said: "High street retailers have faced unprecedented conditions over recent years, and the market for fashion clothing has become increasingly competitive.
"The business has been significantly loss making over recent years and although the directors have sought to restructure and reposition Internacionale, with significant cash investment from shareholders, it has not proved possible."
He said business would continue as usual and the new owners would honour gift vouchers and accept returns of clothes bought before the administration.
Sehgal, who bought the company out of administration from the previous owners in 2008, took over the running of Internacionale in 2011 to oversee a turnaround.
The businessman, worth an estimated £130m, made his fortune selling South Shields-based clothing company Visage in 2010 for £175m.
Meanwhile, toy and hobby chain Modelzone is set to close with the loss of 355 jobs after administrators for the collapsed retailer failed to find a buyer.
The company has endured years of tough trading conditions after a disastrous expansion plan left it with a hefty rent bill it could not afford.
Administrators from Deloitte said they had received a few inquiries but no offers for the business, and the 47 stores will start to shut in the next few weeks.
Modelzone, selling everything from model cars to aircraft and train sets, will disappear from the high street completely unless a last-minute buyer is found, however, a takeover is thought to be highly unlikely.
The website has already been shut down and the stores will start a fire sale to shift the remaining stock. Gift vouchers can still be used, but at 50% of their face value.Modelzone made an operating loss in 2012 of £750,000 and was pushed into administration shortly after the quarterly rent payment day at the end of June – a deadline notorious for putting under struggling retailers.
On April 24 of this year, more than 1,100 people were killed as the Rana Plaza building, a garment factory, collapsed in Savar on the outskirts of Dhaka in Bangladesh.
Since the disaster, more than 50 fashion labels have signed a legally-binding agreement to ensure more rigorous safety standards in the factories that supply their clothes. But the campaign for ethical fashion is going further than that. Two decades since the first sweatshop scandals broke, students across the country are getting involved in a movement for a more ethical fashion industry.
Emma Waight, a human geography PhD student at the University of Southampton, is known in the blogosphere as a key figure in the ethical fashion movement in the UK. She's organised two events at her university this year: The Ethical Fashion Workshop 2013, featuring expert speakers from across the country, and a clothes swap attracting 80 students.
The aim of the swap was to inform students from all courses about ethical fashion. "It's really important to remember that the retail industry has so many areas to it. Everyone buys clothes and students from all kinds of disciplines end up working in retail," said Waight.
Waight's curiosity in the ethical fashion industry was sparked during her BA in fashion promotion and communciation at Southampton Solent University. "I believe that in terms of sustainable consumption, the best thing we can do is buy less. We've got into this culture of buying more and more items because it's easily available, and there's so much choice now," she said.
Charlotte Instone, who recently finished her first year of a BA in fashion buying and merchandising at the London College of Fashion, is another student keen to spread the word about ethical fashion. She read up on the movement after taking a related module during her course.
Instone recently put on an ethical fashion show at her university with a programme of expert panel discussions and clothes stalls from ethical fashion labels. "I wanted to make the event a platform for everything available at the moment," Instone said.
The show raised £900 for Rehema, a charity in Tanzania training women in textile skills, as well as educating fellow students about the industry. Instone has been asked to run it again next year.
One university has recognised this growing trend among students. In September this year, Buckinghamshire New University will pilot a new BA in fashion design, with ethical and sustainable fashion as its unique selling point. The programme looks at the sustainability of various materials and their properties, the conditions for workers in garment industries, and diversity in fashion. Course director Sian Kate-Mooney said: "It's basically saying, 'You don't have to be a size zero, six foot 13-year-old white girl to enjoy and wear fashion'."
The BA has seen a high number of applications, which Mooney puts down to a growing concern with where clothes are coming from and the conditions in which they are made. Speaking about the course at UCAS fairs and open days, she has been encouraged by the number of young people who were interested in the subject.
So why the growing awareness? Could it be that the recent disaster in Bangladesh, which received a good deal of media coverage, has fixed the plight of garment workers and the broader issues within the industry more permanently in peoples' minds? Waight said: "I'm sure it's had an impact – people I've spoken to around university say they're more keen not to buy clothes either from Primark or from Bangladesh."
Instone is also positive that the Rana Plaza disaster has encouraged engagement among her fellow students. "In terms of setting up companies at the moment with how the market is, the only way to do it is to have a really strong USP, and ethical fashion offers something different," she said.
So what are the biggest barriers to engaging the interest of other students? For Waight, it's the cost and availability of ethical products. "Most people do shop on the high street or in familiar places, and unless you're looking for ethical brands you don't find them because they're quite small brands. I think it would be really great if there were more department stores or more independent shops on the high street offering that kind of thing. I think for students, cost is also a big factor," she said.
She also thinks it would be inspirational for young people to have celebrity role models they can look up to for influence in the area. She compares ethical fashion to sustainability and the fair trade movement in the food industry, pointing towards household names such as Jamie Oliver and Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall who champion ethical produce. "I think a lot can be learned from the food industry. People buying free range eggs has no impact on us apart from a warm fuzzy feeling inside, and that's because celebrity chefs have really been heading those kinds of campaigns, so I think we need more of that for ethical fashion," Waight said.
Mooney hopes that once students graduate from the course, they will go to become industry influencers. "Hopefully we will have students who will say, 'That's not ethical, but there are all these ethical solutions.' They will already be equipped to go into the industry."
Top of the agenda for many an Marks & Spencer shareholder at the company's AGM, apart from the contents of the lunchtime goodie bag, is the issue of sleeveless dresses.
Every year, members of the M&S board can be guaranteed questions along the lines of: when will you wake up and bring out more dresses with sleeves? Tuesday's meeting saw the retailer give an emphatic answer.
Style director Belinda Earl said 90% of all new dresses will come with sleeves this autumn.
Earl said: "Since September we've been in listen mode. I'm happy to say sleeves are very much in."
She added that capped sleeves will now be classed as sleeveless, and the new autumn/winter collection will have longer hemlines – answering another perennial shareholder question.
Joanne Entwistle tells us that "dress cannot be understood without reference to the body" [1]. Without a body, a garment's potential is unfulfilled, and clothes that are not worn have a "sinister otherworldliness" [2]. Much as I respect Entwistle's writing, I am inclined to disagree. When we first encounter a garment, it is often hung limply on a hanger or draped over an abstract plinth. If I take a trip to Zara for a new cardigan, I will find it folded in a pile on a display table. This method of display means that I am primarily drawn to a garment not because of how it may fall on my body, but because of the qualities of the fabric.
When we see a garment on a model or mannequin, it is understood that it's communicating the identity of a person. An outfit on a body suggests a certain lifestyle or role. In rigged displays, clothes are removed from the context of being worn. We are forced to see them for their own merits. Fit becomes secondary to texture and colour, and the identity of the wearer is made distinct from the identity of the garment.
It is perhaps for this reason that Gap displays clothes the way it does. In Gap, clothes are often folded and stacked, draped or hung. This allows shoppers to make direct comparison between the colours, and highlights everything that makes the Gap brand distinct from its competitors. While other brands innovate in the cut of their garments, Gap's silhouettes tend to be fairly constant and reliable. It is their colour and logo that primarily set them apart, and these features are most visible when garments are folded on a shelf.
Only by separating the identities of the wearer and the garment can we appreciate clothing for its own merits. This is something that has driven Issey Miyake to display his garments in "installations" rather than catwalk shows [3]. Miyake's primary interest is in the possibilities of textiles. As a student of graphic design, his education focused on the use of abstract and geometric shapes, and block colour. Miyake has sought to transcend the boundaries of the established fashion industry by locating his work in unexpected contexts. His Pleats Please collection is often photographed as a series of food objects, including sushi, ice cream and wine. His 1997 Arizona collection was shown suspended on wires rather than on models "to emphasise their sculptural abstraction" [4]. This shifts the focus away from wearability towards the garment as a fixed shape, a sculptural form and a graphic surface.
Consumers have come to appreciate the significance of Miyake's work as an object. In 1999, he released a line called A-POC ("a piece of cloth"). Rather than ready-made garments, this line presents knitted tubes with seams and hems woven into the fabric. Tamsin Blanchard described it in the Observer in 2001: "Each section of tube contains a mini wardrobe within it. All the consumer has to do is cut out each item, following a set of easy-to-follow instructions." A-POC's particular ingenuity is most visible in its flat state – before the consumer has removed their garment from the tube. It is this flat, incomplete form that has enticed consumers. Many have chosen to leave it uncut, displayed on the walls of their homes as a piece of art [5].
As shop displays move away from the convention of dressing clothes on mannequins, there will be a shift in the way that we view fashion. In rigged displays, the garment may be appreciated as entirely removed from our experience of wearing it. An increase in concern for surface design – patterns and embellishments – is indicative of this shift. We are beginning to learn to appreciate the qualities of the garment itself, distinct from how it makes our bodies look in the mirror.
References:
[1] Enwtistle, Joanne, and Wissinger, Elizabeth. Keeping Up Appearances: Aesthetic Labour in the Fashion Modeling Industries of London and New York; (The Sociological Review 54 (4) (2006), pp. 774-794.
[2] Bancroft, Alison. Fashion and Psychoanalysis, London; I.B. Tauris, 2012, p. 2.
[3] Mackrell, Alice. Art and Fashion, London; B T Batsford, p. 154. (2005)
[4] Quinn, Bradley. Techno Fashion, Oxford: Berg, p. 150. (2002)
[5] Vance, Lin. Issey Miyake's A-POC: A Piece of Cloth; Graphis [online], May/June 2001.
The Pimm's-ometer is set to sunshine, sun cream sales are soaring and shops are stocking up on burgers as Britain prepares for a two-week heatwave.
With temperatures expected to reach 29C in parts of the country on Sunday, compared with a July average of 19.4C, the nation is rediscovering its barbecues and giving a boost to supermarkets, DIY stores and garden centres.
Waitrose closely watches sales of Pimm's, the traditional summer drink, as a barometer for the impact of weather. Sales were up 90% last week. It said sales of salads, soft fruit, white wine, rosé and toiletries, as well as barbecue food and accessories, were likely to rise with the temperature. "The weather has a huge impact on what customers buy. Historically we've benefited from periods of hotter weather," said David Jones, its supply chain director.
Britain continued to bask in a heatwave on Sunday with forecasters expecting the men's final at Wimbledon between Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic being played in temperatures above 30C.
The dry, hot spell will continue for at least another 10 days, according to the Met Office. The last time the country enjoyed a prolonged bout of warm July weather was seven years ago, when temperatures were above 28C in many areas for a fortnight. The hottest region on Sunday was expected to be the Thames Valley and the area around Heathrow airport, where temperatures above 30C are likely.
Only last month leading climate scientists were warning that the UK should ready itself for up to 10 years of washout summers after identifying a new weather pattern in the North Atlantic. Now the UK weather is dominated by a high pressure system that means, according to some reports, that the south-east of England is as hot as northern Algeria and warmer than Sicily.
Inevitably, the glorious weather sparked an exodus to the coast with tourism officials in Brighton expecting around 400,000 visitors over the weekend and Bournemouth anticipating an influx of 200,000 sunseekers. Lifeguards urged beachgoers to check tide times and swim only between designated flags. Health officials also warned that the UK's 15 million hay fever sufferers will have to contend with extremely high pollen counts throughout this week.
Meanwhile, Marks & Spencer said it had sold a record number – almost 1m – punnets of strawberries last week. The sun-loungers are also being wheeled out across the UK, with Asda selling double the amount of suncare products it did last year, while sales of sun cream leapt 10% at Superdrug last weekend. The health and beauty chain expects to sell more suncream and aftersun this weekend than any other, and nearly a third more than the same time last year, when Britain was under a cloud.
Fake-tan sales are also up, with Waitrose expecting sales to soar this weekend.
Burger sales are expected to triple alongside a doubling of rib sales, according to Asda, as barbecues are fired up this weekend. Waitrose said sales of barbecues had risen by 116% and outdoor furniture by 165% in the last few days.
The dash for outdoor living is good news for garden centres still recovering from a chilly Easter, which is usually their biggest time of the year. "In the past six weeks, trade has generally been a lot better than the same period last year," said Peter Burks, chairman of the Garden Centre Association. "Most garden centres are coming back towards parity with 2012 now."
He said that sales were better than expected as gardeners were buying shrubs and other larger plants later into the season because they had been slow to flower after the miserable spring. In the last 10 days, sales of garden furniture have doubled at some centres, as gardeners prepare to sit back and enjoy their work.
"I would love it to be a warm summer, but we don't want temperatures into the 30s, as that would really put everybody off doing their gardening," said Burks.
Once the temperature rises above 28C, shoppers' behaviour changes in all kinds of ways, according to Jones. Rosé wine and cider become more popular, people buy ice lollies instead of ice creams, and mineral water is swapped for fizzy drinks.
However, while a heatwave may be good news for supermarkets, garden centres and seaside towns, it is usually less beneficial for department stores and high-street retailers, particularly those hoping to sell DVDs or computer games to entertain children on rainy weekends.
"The sun doesn't shine on everyone," said Neil Saunders, managing director of retail analyst Conlumino. "The supermarkets do well as people need to buy food, regardless of the weather, but it's generally bad news for the high street."
If the weather becomes too warm, town centres, shopping malls and department stores suffer as people head to the park or beach, with the number of shoppers falling by up to 15%, according to Saunders.
The sun may bring some good news for clothing shops, but could have come too late for many. Most are in the full swing of their end-of-season sales as they clear stock after a slow start to the summer. Sales are thought to have fallen as far as 5% across the high street.
Derek Lovelock, chairman of Oasis, Warehouse, Coast and Karen Millen, said: "It was a difficult start for the whole trade with the unseasonal weather but a warm spell will certainly improve sales and help to clear stock ahead of the autumn."
And while you're basking on the beach or in the garden, remember that the last time the weather forecasters predicted a "barbecue summer" – in 2009 – we all ended up cowering under umbrellas rather than lounging beneath sunshades.
• This article was amended on 8 July 2013 to restore text that was accidentally removed during the editing process.
Images from Prada's autumn/winter 2013 campaign have been released and, along with a requisite supermodel, Christy Turlington, they include 19-year-old Malaika Firth.
This is big news, because Firth is the first black model to be cast by Prada for almost two decades.The last model to hold this accolade was the then 24-year-old Naomi Campbell in 1994, the year Firth was born. While the Italian house is still regarded as visionary in terms of its outlook – it has embraced older male models and curvier women – Prada has been slow to add racial diversity to its campaigns. Before Jourdan Dunn was included in its 2008 catwalk show, Campbell – again – was the last black model to walk for the brand, back in 1993.
This issue is not unique to Prada. Most modelling agencies have fewer black models on their books than white models, claiming that this is because white models are more popular with fashion clients. In a list compiled by Forbes in 2012, the top 10 richest models were all white.
However there are signs this could be changing. Christian Dior's couture show this week – Raf Simons' third for the brand – had a global theme and featured black, Puerto Rican and Chinese models, an interesting move for a designer who, in the past, has often had a catwalk that is largely white. Givenchy designer Riccardo Tisci has been pushing this in a subtle way – he always has diverse catwalk casting and was an early supporter of Puerto Rican model Joan Smalls, who was ranked No 1 in the world late last year by influential website, models.com.
The presence of Firth, who was born in Kenya and grew up in the UK, in this campaign is undeniably symbolic, but it is also a massive endorsement for her. Doe-eyed and with delicate features, Firth started modelling two years ago and has previously appeared on the Asos website and in Rollercoaster magazine. The Prada campaign is her first advertising campaign and follows cameos on the brand's catwalk, most recently in the menswear show for spring/summer 2014. If Dunn's career – she was the last black British model to reach Vogue cover-girl status – is any guide, this should only the beginning.
Peter Ruis, the man who transformed John Lewis from a staid shop best known for its sensible cardigans and cosy slippers into a fashion mecca, is leaving the department store to become the boss of Jigsaw.
After almost nine years at the retailer, six in charge of fashion, Ruis leaves the clothing side of the business in good shape. Fashion sales topped £1.1bn last year, up from £700m in 2005, after a string of rave reviews for its own-label brand and designer collections.
Andy Street, managing director at John Lewis, said everyone would be sad to see Ruis go. "Peter has revolutionised our fashion, home and technology offer," he said.
Ruis, who has also worked at Marks & Spencer, starts at Jigsaw in September, raising hopes that he can sprinkle some magic over the 61-store retailer, which analysts say has become dull and tired.
Jigsaw has lost its status as a prominent niche brand on the UK high street, according to Maureen Hinton, a retail analyst at Verdict. She said: "It seems to have been stuck in a rut and has got an air of yesterday about it … It just needs someone to go in there and shake it up and rejuvenate it."
"[Peter Ruis] has got a very good brand background. He understands what brands need to do to stand out."
Jigsaw had the potential to be a successful niche brand, like Hobbs and Ted Baker, she added, "but at the moment, it is just a bit dull."
Ruis said he was "hugely excited to be joining such an iconic British brand", which he said had "huge untapped potential".
Under Ruis's stewardship, John Lewis clothing become a talking point on the fashion pages. He dropped lines with an old-fashioned reputation, such as the British label Jacques Vert, and introduced a range of well-received new collections, such as Somerset, by Alice Temperley, and the cheaper brand Kin.
The department store sought to burnish its fashion credentials further last month by putting John Lewis's own-brand menswear on the catwalk at an elite London fashion event.
"We have taken the customer with us, and the more fashionable we get, the more interested they become," Ruis told the Observer in an interview in March.
He attributed the retailer's success to attracting well-heeled customers across the age range, rather than targeting the 18- 24-year-olds looking for a party outfit.
"Historically, we have been told that our customers are more affluent and a bit older, but increasingly our research has shown that to be a bit simplistic," he said.
Paula Nickolds will take over his job as buying and brand director in the autumn. Nickolds, 40, joined the company as a graduate trainee 19 years ago and has worked her way up to her current position, as buying director for home products.
"She has a got a good understanding of the John Lewis customer and where [the business] is going as well," Hinton said."
Schiaparelli has never been an ordinary fashion house. Elsa Schiaparelli was a fashion designer whose clothes grew out of art, not dressmaking. Salvador Dali described her studio in the 1930s as "the beating heart of Surrealist Paris".
Her famous putdown for her lifelong rival, Coco Chanel, was to call her "that milliner", a reference to what she saw as Chanel's prosaic approach to the issue of what women wear.
Yves Saint Laurent, a great admirer of Schiaparelli and her work, lists "her particular charms" as "her brutality, her arrogance, her self-possession, disdain, storms of anger, odd whims" in his foreword to her biography.
So the return of the Schiaparelli name to Paris fashion was never going to be an ordinary comeback. To be true to the brand, it had to be Shocking – the name Schiaparelli gave to her signature colour, a violent blue-toned pink which Saint Laurent described as having "the nerve of red".
The first subversive note was that the 18 outfits shown at the Musée Arts Decoratifs were created by Christian Lacroix, a legendary fashion designer, but one whose association with Schiaparelli is limited to this collection, and ends now. The second was that these clothes are for display only and not available to buy, at any price. Order books will not be opened at the house this season, however much money is offered by the super rich clients of haute couture.
The third subversive note was that even now – six years after Diego Della Valle, owner of the Italian Tod's group, bought the Schiaparelli house and announced their attention to relaunch – there is no official confirmation of who the Schiaparelli designer will be, although it has been widely reported that Marco Zanini of Rochas will be given the job.
This is, by any standard, an unconventional way to relaunch a brand – which, of course, is exactly the point. And in keeping with the unorthodox mood this was not one comeback, but two. This was Christian Lacroix's first fashion week appearance since his label was forced to close four years ago. Lacroix has since forged a stellar career designing costumes for opera and ballet, curating exhibitions, and designing hotel interiors, and proclaims himself happy to have moved on from the catwalk; many in the industry, however, still mourn the loss of his vividly coloured, richly evocative catwalk shows.
The Schiaparelli installation was held in the wood-panelled rooms of the Musée Arts Decoratifs where Lacroix presented his last catwalk show. On that day, the windows overlooking the Louvre courtyard rattled in the rain, and his adoring seamstresses sobbed backstage. Four years later, the sun streamed through the windows onto the 18 outfits Lacroix had designed for Schiaparelli, and he was welcomed as a returning hero.
The appointment of Lacroix to create this curtain-raiser for the Schiaparelli brand was inspired. There are natural synergies between Lacroix's aesthetic and that of Elsa herself, particularly in gloriously eccentric colour combinations (billiard green with Shocking pink, paprika red with electric blue) and flamboyant silhouettes untramelled by narrow metropolitan ideas of chic. (Lacroix, a native of Arles, told Womenswear Daily this week that he and the Rome-born Elsa Schiaparelli "were really the same, from the Mediterranean, Latin people fascinated by Paris.")
Lacroix initially produced 99 sketches, each based in some way on a design or an idea of Schiaparelli's, and then worked with a team of 12 in the Schiaparelli atelier to produce a final 18 outfits.
The cage which stood at the door of Schiaparelli's Place Vendôme boutique was reconstructed in bamboo at the entrance to this display. Virtual hummingbirds on mini iPads fluttered among the silk cherry blossom, a neat modern update on Elsa Schiaparelli's obsession with birds, bugs and insects.
On the clothes themselves, displayed on mannequins on a golden carousel, Lacroix paid homage to Elsa the surrealist with a golden bug brooches menacing the hip of a tailored jacket. The sharp points of a corset neckline were modelled on an upside down heart. Lacroix echoed the deeply artistic nature of Schiap's studio, by abandoning any notion of wearability: one crinoline skirt in this collection is made up of so many layers that it weighs almost 40kg.
But he also signposted the ways in which Schiaparelli's vision as an emancipated woman in the 1930s was daringly modern and practical: the zippered jumpsuit she pioneered was revived by Lacroix, as were dresses with deep pockets, an innovation she championed.
Schiaparelli have indicated that the announcement of a designer is imminent. From next year, they will present clothes commercially both on the elite haute couture schedule and on the ready-to-wear catwalks. The headquarters at 21 Place Vendôme will house a Schiaparelli boutique once again.
The relaunch is unlikely to be easy. Almost sixty years have passed since the Schiaparelli name was last on the catwalk and while the name is still revered in fashion history it has taken on a dusty academic note. To most consumers, it means little.
But Elsa Schiaparelli herself is proof that doing things differently can pay dividends. In 1937 she conceived the perfume, Shocking, whose name, fragrance, pink packaging and bottle – modelled on Mae West's tailor's dummy, it was the first in the form of a woman's body – caught the public imagination.
Shocking became an important source of revenue for her business, allowing her the freedom to design cocktail hats modelled on pork chops in collaboration with Salvador Dali, and make a silk dress with a larger-than-life hand-painted lobster on the skirt for Wallis Simpson's trousseau. Lacroix has got Schiaparelli off to a flying start – it remains to be seen whether Della Valle can keep the dream alive.
Forget Taste the Difference. From September, Sainsbury's will be the go-to place for an on-trend cape. An event in London this week introduced a new look for the supermarket's tired Tu clothing range. Trend-led pieces are being rolled out across menswear, womenswear and childrenswear in a bid to take on fast-fashion success stories such as Zara. "It's about fashion in supermarkets," said Sainsbury's head of clothing James Brown at the relaunch, "not supermarket fashion."
The move isn't just a ploy to keep customers instore for longer – it makes hard business sense. Figures from 2012 show that clothing sales in the UK grew by just under 3% but the growth from supermarket clothing ranges was more than twice that, at 6.2%. Sainsbury's have invested in Tu, which is now in nearly 400 stores out of over 600 nationwide, as an area with potential for growth. The supermarket brand is now the seventh biggest seller across clothing in the UK. It posted sales of £680m last year with a 15% increase in customers buying clothing. Tu is now growing at three times the rate of Sainsbury's food business.
Sainsbury's began to implement "drops" of new designs into its stores every six weeks last year – replicating the model that Zara has used to such success. The design team has almost doubled in size since 2011. "We have focused on what the customer wants," said Brown. "They're interested in newness and quality. It's about price but also quality and value. Price isn't the first any more."
Evidence suggests consumers are increasingly responding to trend-led pieces. Brown points to a skater-style dress with a Delft print that has become a bestseller for summer, and suggests that pieces which play to catwalk trends for autumn – such as the parka – will do the same when they go into store. Highlights for autumn include a £15 windbreaker in an on-trend rust shade and a chic navy waffle-knit jumpers for men, and a 60s-style cocoon coat at £50 or £55 leather riding boots for women. There are also more directional pieces for women, who account for most of the brand's sales. See a "conversational" jumper featuring a fox – not forgetting that cape.
The most popular items for Tu are still basics: leggings, underwear and shapewear. Brown readily admits that 60% of Tu purchases beyond these categories are on impulse – suggesting consumers still don't go to Sainsburys to buy the majority of their clothes. "Budgets are tight," he says. "We have to create outfits that catch attention."
Tu is introducing store-in-store formats similar to those on fashion floors of department stores, complete with bespoke staff and – a first – fitting rooms, into the 161 stores that will stock the full range of designs. Kate Ormrod, a retail analyst at Verdict, says this could increase sales. "It needs to change so it's not just a place where you shop for groceries, with an aisle for clothing," she says. "It makes sense that the person stacking beans won't be the same one telling you what's in fashion this season."
Along with Tu, which launched in 2004, Asda's George and Tesco's Florence & Fred have focused on trend-led design more in recent years. George is a sponsor of Graduate fashion week and often recruits new design graduates. "Design is a key part of what we do and we get to see first hand the very best of the new designers," says Fiona Lambert, brand director of George. "It keeps the business very fresh." George has introduced G21 Talent – a limited-edition range by young designers including, currently, Kingston graduate Jessica Piper – who has a collection of vibrant catwalk-like palm prints. According to Lambert, these collections regularly sell out.
Designs in-store at Tesco, Sainsbury's and Asda now include what you might find on the high street: jumpsuits, bold prints, slogan T-shirts and floral playsuits. Ormrod says it's important to tailor trends to the customer – women between 25 and 45, according to Brown. "Consumers are more interested in trends," she says, "but they have to be careful not to target the younger consumer too much – it's difficult to get that customer instore." The target audience for Tu's womenswear business is working mothers rather than their teenage daughters.
While fashion in supermarkets crosses over to the territory of fashion-only budget retailers such as Primark, it's unlikely that it will ever surpass that particular fast-fashion giant, which posted an increase in profits by 24% over six months earlier this year. The chain is still a destination for ontrend design at pocket-friendly prices for most consumers, judging by the amount of shoppers outside the flagship on London's Oxford Street bearing bulging Primark bags. This relaunch means, however, that there might be a Tu one among them come autumn.
Since getting itself talked about was the only comprehensible reason why a lifestyle magazine would run a suicide-themed fashion spread, last week's internationally condemned fashion spread on suicide was a triumph for a publication that one might, in a supremely futile act of resistance, not bother to name. The whole thing could hardly have gone better: from publication of "Last Words", to the first tweeted expressions of outrage, to lengthy condemnatory articles, to withdrawal of the offending piece, and the editors' widely publicised semi-grovel — all within 24 hours.
Throughout, the publication responsible was introduced in news stories as "the hipster's bible", a trusted, super-edgy brand, new readers learned, for the kind of dashing young iconoclasts who dress in Prada or Issa – a couple of the labels into which the fashion team had inserted models pretending to be famous women writers just after, or in a more how-to mode, in the act of, suicide. One of the late writers has a living, 11-year-old son. In its apology – which will have doubled as a perfect, hi, subscribe and we'll send you 12 issues per year opportunity – the editors explained that their fashion spreads "are always unconventional".
The women suicides shoot, for instance, was a hipsterish way of focusing "on the demise of a set of writers whose lives we very much wish weren't cut tragically short, especially at their own hands". Just as you might, say, use a fashion spread to focus on the demise of a set of underpaid garment workers whose lives you wished weren't cut tragically short, especially in a collapsed building.
Once it's explained, you get that posing demised bodies in the latest must-haves is an unconventional fash way of showing you care – so long, obviously, that no clothes are harmed in the process. And that shockwaves are bound to be created, among non-hipsters, when fashion is approached this way, as the magazine puts it, "with an art editorial point of view rather than a typical fashion photo-editorial one".
Now the only people who could be offended by that excuse, surely, are the many rival fashion magazines who work, no less tirelessly, and with an equal disregard for convention, to ensure that their own work resembles art and not "typical fashion photo-editorial". Think, for example, of the current Interview magazine sequence, in which pathological hoarding, rather than suicide, is having a moment. In "The Hoarder", this magazine's study in mental disorder/fash contrasts, a pallid beauty poses amid piled-up filth and chaos. "She's a contemporary Miss Havisham, as modernity meets tradition and classically tailored coats and jackets meet exaggerated boots and enormous wedges," runs the caption, referencing fashion's favourite – if non-hoarding – Dickens character: "Here comes pre-Fall."
Condé Nast staff, too, must be justifiably affronted by the suggestion that the suicide-fashion team have the monopoly on in-your-face fashion provocation. Was not Vogue Italia, a few years back, the first to show models looking dead in a polluted, seaside context, "precious reportage that delivers an artistic impact"? The photographer Steven Meisel laid the model Kristen McMenamy out like, sort of, BP's dead seabirds, if they, too, had expired in tastefully wrecked Ralph Lauren and Clinique. "She keeps her skin golden thanks to Self Tan Face Bronzing Gel Tint (to wear alone or with foundation)," is how Vogue glossed the desperate scene, with the pragmatic attention to detail that distinguishes this field of artistic endeavour: "It takes care of the skin, while giving it a hint of colour."
If last week's suicide creatives did not, incomprehensible as this might seem, ever consider issues of taste or responsibility, as this exercise in suicide trivialisation progressed from being deliciously out there into a glossy finished product, it could be because the absence of principles is, in so many respects, still vital to fashion industry profits. Start obsessing about taste and responsibility and where will it all stop? If fashion editors conceded, for instance, the case against dressing up death and illness to sell tights and enormous wedges and, thereby, advertising space, they might, in no time, be confronting equally difficult questions about their glamorising of emaciation, and of allegedly tax-evading designers and of tyranny, in those ever popular, meet-the-psychopath's-wife slots.
As much as the invention of ethical fashion has raised awareness of the pollution and human exploitation intrinsic to an industry built on waste, it may also have contributed, less usefully, to an expectation that, if only fashion could guarantee carbon neutrality and fair trade, it would emerge as, if not 100% wholesome, no worse than any other form of cultural production. If greenness and improved sweatshops are all it needs to be ethical, we can look forward to John Galliano's ethical antisemitism, Ralph Lauren's ethical bribery and Dolce and Gabbana's ethical tax-evasion. Or how about a new line in ethical interviews in which we find, say, Asma al-Assad, Vogue's "Anon GM Rose in the Desert", in scrupulously vintage Loubs, with a special message about sustainable oppression?
Going further in the application of ethics to fashion, it may not be fanciful to imagine a time when the regular distribution of clothes, accessories and beauty products, gifts whereby legions of fashion writers, celebrities and bloggers are groomed by fashion PRs into a condition of helpless adulation, is restricted to strictly recyclable items.
It's more difficult, though, to see how eco-friendly ethics would influence some equally long-established fashion traditions, such as paying Hollywood names to sit, fan-like, in the front row or, equally, persecuting journalists who have misused that privilege.
Thanks to a few journalists, including Liz Jones, Laura Craik and the Guardian's Hadley Freeman, who was once banned from his show by national treasure Paul Smith, the public is gaining some appreciation of the human cost of keeping fashion coverage permanently ecstatic, about absolutely everything.
When, for example, Cathy Horyn, fashion editor of the New York Times, advertised her eight-year exclusion from his shows, an exercised Hedi Slimane, the Saint Laurent designer, confirmed that, for all that it's now the stuff of doting V&A and Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibitions, fashion remains altogether too fabulous an art to be subjected to normal rules of critical engagement.
Horyn was, Slimane said , a "schoolyard bully", "thick" and, style-wise, "seriously challenged". Publishers and theatre directors must dream, reading stuff like this, of enjoying the same power to insult and exclude unhelpful journalists, without surrendering a fraction of the esteem they enjoy among more amenable critics or, at any rate, among the ones who depend on their advertising or handbags.
For, like designer tax evasion, garment sweatshops and the fate of tissue-eating models, the suborning of the media is too delicate a question to detain upscale fashion reportage while being, at the same time, too commonplace to outrage everyone else.
Shares in fashion retailer Ted Baker have reached a record high after international expansion drove a better than expected spring performance.
The company said sales increased by 32.7% in the 20 weeks to 15 June compared with the same period last year, with both retail sales and wholesale business growing. Ted Baker has grown its international footprint since the start of the year by opening concessions in France, Spain, the Netherlands and Tokyo alongside shops in Shanghai, Adelaide, Beirut and Kuwait.
Founder and chief executive Ray Kelvin said: "We are continuing to invest in developing the Ted Baker brand internationally and have been encouraged by the reaction to the brand and the collections in our new markets."
The scale of the sales increase appeared to take the City by surprise, with shares soaring 16%, closing up 230p at a record high of £17. Shares in the company have risen 63% in the last year.
In the UK, the company is reviewing its store portfolio. It has closed the Kings Road store in London and moved its Stansted Airport store to Gatwick as the airport is being redeveloped.
Meanwhile, electrical retailer Dixons, owner of Currys and PC World, saw its UK business return to growth for the first time in several years, as sales rose 7% in the year to 30 April. The company said it was on the road from "survivor to winner" as it benefited from the boom in tablet sales and gained market share following the collapse of its rival Comet.
The chief executive, Seb James, claimed that half of the company's growth had come from winning customers from Comet. He added that sales of tablet computers will keep climbing. "There's lots of road left in this particular product. Less than a third of UK households now have a tablet. And there's going to be some further product innovation as these tablets get thinner and lighter and more powerful."
The most popular lines are the Apple iPad, the Samsung Galaxy and the Google Nexus.
Underlying profit rose 15% to £94.5m, although that swung to a loss of £115.3monce the impact of restructuring its troubled European online business Pixmania was included. Analysts said Pixmania lost £31m and the retailer's southern European stores lost £24m.
Dixons ended the year with £42.1m of net cash, having started it with £104m of net debt. James said the return to a cash-positive position had come a year earlier than expected.
He added: "That's a big milestone for a business where we were constantly asked how we were going to survive."
James also revealed the company has appointed advisors to look at offloading Pixmania.
How far should a brand go to stay edgy, even if it means their readers end up dead? Vice magazine is aiming to find out.
The youth culture magazine has published a fashion spread of models recreating the suicides of famous female writers. There is Sylvia Plath poised in front of the gas oven, wearing an on-trend Suno dress and Virginia Woolf wading into the water in a gothic Christian Siriano coat and vintage frock.
On one level, we shouldn't be surprised by the raging tastelessness on display here: this is what Vice does. Its brand is all about shocking and busting taboos; its schtick is mixing serious reportage from some of the most hellish places on earth with pointless videos of topless models and headlines such as "Why are the British obsessed with sheds?"
But underneath the gonzo self-image it is so keen to promote, Vice is a giant old-school corporation. According to the New Yorker's recent feature on the brand, it has 35 offices in 18 countries and a million subscribers to its YouTube channel. It was valued at $200m in 2011 and its CEO, Shane Smith, says its goal is to be "the largest network for young people in the world". Underneath its yellow skinny jeans, Vice is wearing a suit.
This is the paradox of the new media age: some of the most wild, crazy-looking sites are being run like traditional businesses. Reddit, home of violently misogynistic forums called things such as Beating Women, is owned by Advanced Publications, the same parent company as Condé Nast, publisher of GQ and Vogue. It's just that neither side likes to talk about it.
So what is a slick corporation to do when it wants to appeal to young people? Why, outrage public decency, of course. And that is hard on the internet, where people swear like they breathe and you can't move for erect nipples. So companies like Vice have to poke at other taboos, like sexual violence, drug use and suicide.
The worst thing is, it works. Creating a Twitter storm every so often is exactly what Vice wants. It doesn't have aspirations to be taken seriously, so it doesn't need to apologise if anyone is offended. It doesn't have the kind of editors who are likely to be hauled in front of a select committee to explain themselves. And although it publishes a British edition, it doesn't feel like part of the fabric of the British media. There will be no Leveson-style inquiry into its actions; it can easily tell the PCC to bugger off.
But let's not be in any doubt about what Vice has done. The Samaritans have guidelines covering both journalistic and creative depictions of suicide, and they are very clear: avoid glamorising suicide and avoid giving details of the methods. It is widely accepted that following these rules reduces copycat suicides. If you live in London, you'll regularly hear announcements about passenger incidents and delays due to a person under a train, but you won't find them routinely written up in the Evening Standard. That's for a very good reason: the Samaritans quote studies from Vienna and Toronto where voluntary restrictions on reporting subway suicides reduced their occurrence by 75%.
Similarly, the inclusion of a particular suicide method in a popular television show or prominent media report has been shown to increase suicide attempts by that method. Every year in England and Wales, about 24,000 young people between the age of 10 and 19 attempt suicide. What will children in that kind of distress see when they look at those Vice pictures? They will see a menu. Using famous women makes it worse, because vulnerable people can fixate on a favourite writer and identify with them.
As a journalist, covering suicide is always hard because there is a fine line between raising awareness of a vital public health issue and contributing to a spectacle that could harm vulnerable people. Which of those two was the feminist website Jezebel doing when it decided to republish Vice's pictures, alongside outraged commentary? And have the thousands of tweets on the subject, not to mention this article, simply told Vice that it has found a tender spot in our collective consciousness, which it can jab to great effect?
I don't have the answer to that and it is easy to find things to be outraged about these days. But this one is worth being angered by, because tonight, there might be one less Vice reader in the world.
• This article was amended on 18 June 2013 to remove a reference to a particular method of suicide
• If you have been affected by the issues raised in this article, for information and support visit the Samaritans website or call 08457 909090
Several hundred garment workers have been taken ill at their factory outside Bangladesh's capital, apparently after drinking water there.
A police official, Mohammad Jahid, said many of the workers had been treated at various hospitals after the incident at East West factory in Gazipur district.
Jahid said most of the workers had suffered vomiting and stomach problems, which were not life-threatening. He said up to 4,000 workers were employed in the factory.
Earlier this month, contaminated drinking water caused illness among 450 workers at Starlight Sweater factory in the same area. Authorities cleaned the reservoir and reopened the factory a day later. Jahid said there had not been any legal action against that factory.
A building collapse near Dhaka in April killed 1,129 workers, injured many others and highlighted hazardous working conditions in the more than 4,000 garment factories in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh earns about $20bn (£13bn) each year from exports of garment products, mainly to the United States and Europe, accounting for nearly 80% of the country's export earnings.
The Mulberry appointment is thrown wide open by the fact that prime candidate Katie Hillier landed herself a very smart new job only two weeks ago. Katie Hillier has been a kingmaker of the It bag world for a decade, creating sellout bags for Marc Jacobs and Victoria Beckham, among others. Part of a golden set of London college graduates (Stella McCartney, Katie Grand, Luella Bartley, Giles Deacon) Hillier is ridiculously well-connected but also one of the nicest women in fashion. If she hadn't just been appointed creative director of Marc by Marc Jacobs, this would be a shoo-in.
In fashion maths, London = Fun. (NB: New York = Money, Paris = Chic, Milan = Sex/Power.) Having the smarts to maximise and monetise this important variable (eg putting dogs on the catwalk; having the Muppets on the soundtrack) has been a key element of Hill's success at Mulberry. Lulu Kennedy can run a meeting all day, but she can dance on the table all night as well. The new Mulberry creative director needs to keep the brand plugged into the quirky-British-humour energy source, which Lulu Kennedy, fairy godmother to up-and-coming British talent turned designer in her own right, could do.
Sophie Hulme, most recent winner of the emerging talent award for accessories at the British fashion awards, would be a statement appointment for Mulberry. Her sleek, clean-lined totes have become a staple in the wardrobe of every London fashionista who can't afford Céline (ie, 99.9%). Hulme's star has risen as part of the modern minimalist movement, and her appointment would represent a move on from the jolly, bags-with-silly-charms-on aesthetic that defined Mulberry's heyday under Hill. If Mulberry is feeling brave, Hulme could be in with a shot.
Charlotte Dellal, designer of the Charlotte Olympia label, has a wickedly British, dark sense of humour. Her latest collection of accessories has a fairytale theme: think espadrilles with Rapunzel-braided soles, and pumps with chunky heels styled to resemble book spines, imprinted with the legend "Happily Ever After." Half-sister of Chanel model Alice Dellal, Charlotte has an address book that would fill the front row with glamorous women, which is key because the front row has always been a Mulberry strong suit. A Cordwainers graduate, Dellal began as a shoe designer before expanding into bags – but in an era when a menswear designer can take the helm at Yves Saint Laurent womenswear, as Hedi Slimane has done, that isn't necessarily a dealbreaker.
Nicolas Ghesquière was unceremoniously released from Balenciaga last year, but the fashion rumour mill is convinced he is poised for a comeback. Womenswear Daily has named him the designer most likely to succeed Marc Jacobs at Louis Vuitton if that contract is not renewed when it comes up next year, but no official announcement is thought to be imminent. The Somerset-rooted Mulberry company culture might be a stretch for Ghesquière, a designer steeped in the history of Paris couture. But in the two years since Mulberry poached the Hermès managing director, Bruno Guillon, as CEO, the British label has edged closer in its outlook to that of a French luxury house. It's unlikely, but not impossible.
• This article was amended on June 17 at 10.30. The article originally stated that Katie Hillier was a Central Saint Martins graduate. In fact she attended the University of Westminster.
The woman widely credited with transforming Mulberry from a quiet British fashion house into a must-have global brand has shocked the luxury goods world, and the City, by announcing her intention to quit, in a move that wiped nearly £40m off the company's value.
Emma Hill joined Mulberry as creative director at the depth of the recession in 2008 and, hitching the firm's conservative reputation to hipster royalty such as Alexa Chung and Lana Del Rey, helped spur a fivefold increase in its share price.
Mulberry issued a terse confirmation that one of the industry's most successful partnerships is coming to an end, amid rumours of a falling out between Hill and the chief executive, Bruno Guillon, over the company's direction.
"Mulberry confirms that Emma has informed the company that she wishes to leave after a very successful period at Mulberry during which she has built a strong and talented creative team working for her," it said.
Shareholders marked their concerns about her imminent departure by sending the company's shares down 8% to 980p.
Worth more than £1.4bn a year ago, Mulberry has seen its value halve over the past 12 months due to a series of profit warnings, but analysts warned that the business could suffer further without Hill.
Neil Saunders, managing director of retail analysts Conlumino, said Mulberry was losing a unique talent. "She was the impetus behind the brand in terms of design and marketing, and for any luxury brand like Mulberry that's the heart of the business. It leaves open to question which direction the company takes next.
"Before her tenure Mulberry didn't use any celebrity endorsement and she saw a real opportunity to create a buzz around celebrities using these bags, making them must-have items.
"She created a must-have product at a high price point, which is very difficult to do."
The 42-year-old blended the company's British heritage with celebrity culture to make it a crucial part of the Brit it girl's wardrobe. TV presenter Chung became the poster girl and other paparazzi-friendly celebrities ranging from Eliza Doolittle to Pixie Geldof were regulars at Mulberry's London fashion week shows. She also broadened the brand's appeal by naming a bag after American singer Del Rey.
Hill was awarded a CBE last year for services to the fashion industry, having previously spent 14 years working with leading fashion brands in New York. When she was appointed at Mulberry few outside the fashion world would have known her name. Arguably, however, they would have known her work following stints at Marc Jacobs, Gap, and Marks & Spencer. It was at Marc Jacobs that she had her first it bag hit – the Stella – a handheld with two pockets on the front.
She has been a passionate defender of Mulberry's artisanal heritage, with the company preparing to expand its bag manufacturing factory in Somerset, where it has trebled output since her appointment to 2,000 bags a week.
In an interview in 2012 she said: "I'm from Wales and my family are bakers and miners, people who did things with their hands."
However, Mulberry has suffered over the past year, issuing a series of profit warnings as it admitted that tourists were not snapping up its products at the levels expected in London, where bags cost between £400 and £4,500.
At Christmas Guillon said Chinese tourists in particular had not been buying enough products at Mulberry's main London stores, while international sales had also suffered.
One of Hill's biggest coups was persuading Chung to put her name to a range of handbags in 2009 after she emerged as a fan of the brand. The bags are still some of Mulberry's bestselling items.
Guillon finds himself in a difficult position as he attempts to replace Hill, who also introduced well-groomed dogs to Mulberry's renowned catwalk shows. Gullion is expected to announce a fall in profits for the business on Thursday.
Saunders said: "It's a shame he hasn't managed to keep her and it doesn't bode well because it puts the pressure on him to replace her with someone of equal stature. The heart of a brand like Mulberry is on its creatives and if that's wrong everything else fails."
Guillon joined from French brand Hermes last year and has vowed to continue an international drive to pick up affluent customers, particularly in China, where close rival Burberry has been performing strongly. Mulberry's focus remains international expansion.
Speaking this year, Guillon said: "We are still very confident with the strategy and will not be changing it.
"We need to focus on increasing our international presence, particularly with tactical advertising, so that tourists coming to London and Paris from China know about the brand."
When Emma Hill joined Mulberry at the end of 2007, few outside the fashion world would have known her name. Arguably, however, they would have known her work. British-born Hill had previously been a successful accessories designer in New York, working with Marc Jacobs and Gap, with a stint at Marks & Spencer thrown in. It was at Marc Jacobs that she had her first it bag hit – the Stella, a handheld boxy style, with two pockets on the front.
While Emma Hill was loth to call her designs "it" bags, she has frequently called a successful design a nose-twitcher: one she knew was a hit even at the prototype stage.
Her instincts were almost always bang on. Hill had the magic to bewitch the bag-buying public while at Mulberry – making the brand appeal across demographics, from laptop-toting businesswomen to aspirational teenagers. It's this mass appeal that Mulberry will miss the most.
If Hill made the brand known to all, she made sure it was placed with all the right people. Kate Moss liked the prototype of Hill's first Mulberry bag design so much she took it away with her.
But Hill's greatest hit was the Alexa bag, a satchel shape named after Alexa Chung, which became a bestseller despite being launched in a recession. At the height of its success, in 2010, 380 were sold in a week, even with the £750 price tag.
Hill's work for Mulberry was always right for the zeitgeist. Her success came with minimal hardware – the metal fastenings on bags, which were crucial to the first wave of "it" bags.
She told the fashion website WWD in 2008 she couldn't "bear hardware that doesn't feel real". By streamlining, she rejuvenated a tired genre. This chimed with a generation in search of labels that didn't shout too loudly. Fashion's front row is still dotted with Hill's designs.
While the ready-to-wear has yet to convince, these shows became essential. With a British quirkiness on display, tired editors were often perked up with catwalks that featured forests, the Muppets' Mahna Mahna on the soundtrack and dogs on the runway.
Who will take over and guide Mulberry now is unclear – but they have very big, probably high, shoes to fill. It is rumoured her plan is to join the giant US accessory powerhouse Coach. They'll be lucky to have her.
When a member of Paul Smith's team discovered that the fashion designer was to be the focus of an exhibition at the Design Museum their first question was "great, will there be any clothes in it?" The reaction is a flattering testament to Smith's creativity and influence in design well beyond the confines of the catwalk.
Hello, My Name is Paul Smith, which will open on 15 November, aims to tell the story of a quintessentially English label that became one of the world's leading fashion brands. It will look at the 40-year career of the designer from Nottingham with ambitions to become a racing cyclist who set up a tiny 3 sq m shop and now heads a global brand stocked in 74 countries.
Donna Loveday, the exhibition's curator, praised Smith's "unique and innovative take on design" and said that his involvement in his firm as designer and chairman, and his "warmth, humour and wit" had resulted in the company's widely acknowledged personal touch, despite its size.
The exhibition will recreate the designer's office, which promises to be a highlight of the show. Within fashion circles, the room has a reputation for being one of the most fascinating offices in the industry, stuffed with a curious collection of objects sent in from around the world.
One fan, whom Smith describes as "the mystery person", has been sending in oddities ranging from an Austrian cowbell to a broom over the past 20 years. All arrive addressed but unwrapped. Another regular correspondent, a teenager from Belgium named Margot, recently sent in a nativity scene made from peanuts, with a note that read: "I don't like fashion but I like you."
The packages and letters form a collection that both frustrates and inspires those who work and visit Paul Smith HQ. The room will attempt to show what goes on inside the designer's head. "There'll be free paracetamol on the way in," joked Smith.
Another room will feature the designer's diverse collaborations since the brand was launched in 1976, including jerseys for the Giro d'Italia cycling race to Leica cameras to products for the Rug Company. One section will pay tribute to the designer's wife, Pauline, also a trained designer who Smith credits with teaching him "all aspects of design".
Despite its focus on fashion, the designer hopes that the exhibition will be "non-elitist" and reach a wider audience than just industry students. It will aim to contextualise a catwalk show as part of the process of design rather than the endgame, and offer an insight into production, craftsmanship and marketing.
The designer, who is known to discreetly advise a range of younger colleagues, said: "Not a lot of designers understand that it's about making something for the correct price and selling it to a shop that can then sell it."
At today's press conference announcing the exhibition, the designer admitted that some of his collections from the past, which will be on show, now looked odd in terms of proportions and cuts. He joked that he'd recently seen a man on a train station wearing a dinosaur print coat he had made and he had resisted the urge to push him off the platform. That particular design was unlikely to make the exhibition's final edit, said Smith. "But everything else I'm OK with."
When French luxury goods firm Hermès threw down the gauntlet – a hand-stitched top-grain leather one, of course – to rival Louis Vuitton Moët Hennessy in 2010, it might have been hoping for a discreet, gentlemanly outcome. Instead, the challenge sparked years of public squabbling that in the refined circles inhabited by its wealthy clients could be defined as most ungenteel. Now, having raged for three years, the Gallic "handbag war" is entering a new phase.
In the next few weeks, the French authorities are expected to rule on the bitter dispute between the two firms. Did LVMH sneakily and with great subterfuge attempt a creeping takeover of Hermès when it obtained shares in the company using cash-settlement equity swaps and, it is claimed, subsidiaries? If so, it could face a fine of up to €10m.
Or has Hermès, anxious to remain family-run and independent, engaged in a snobbish and condescending "slander and smear" campaign against its bigger, brasher rival? If so, the company that referred to LVMH boss Bernard Arnault, France's richest man, as an "intruder in the garden" (adding "we don't want him in the house") will have to learn to live with its uninvited and unwanted guest.
If the buoyant luxury goods market, which appears to be bucking the recession, was not so important to France's struggling economy, the handbags-at-dawn standoff between two of the country's most prestigious brands might be mildly amusing.
Its first customer may have been a horse, but Hermès has come a long way from its relatively humble beginnings as a harness and bridle shop for European nobles. This is the company that made scarves for Queen Elizabeth II and Jackie Onassis– who decorated her walls with them – and boots for the former shah of Iran, and created the once-ubiquitous "Kelly" bag, named for Princess Grace of Monaco.
Hermès, which has gone from strength to strength in recent years, and posted a record-breaking profit of €740m in 2012, on a €3.48bn turnover, is also purveyor of the ultimate "it" bag, the Birkin – named after British singer Jane Birkin – whose price can match that of a luxury car and whose exclusiveness has survived reports that queen of bling Victoria Beckham has 100 of them in her closet.
Not that Hermès talks about its customers. For a firm that considers its hand-stitched, hand-crafted goods the ne plus ultra of refinement, good taste and timeless luxury, such a lack of discretion would be downright vulgar. Hermès makes no secret of considering itself several cuts above Louis Vuitton. The right-of-centre Le Figaro newspaper reported that the Hermès family has "always had a condescending view of Louis Vuitton and its bags of coated canvas".
Asked once why Hermès shunned initials, Xavier Guerrand-Hermès, great-great-grandson of Thierry Hermès, who opened the first harness shop in Paris in 1837, retorted: "If someone knows us, they will know us."
To the Hermès clan, LVMH is a brash upstart, as is Arnault, a close friend of former president Nicolas Sarkozy, also viewed as a parvenu. The stable of firms in Arnault's empire, acquired often by snapping up small, dispute-riven companies, includes Moët & Chandon, the world's largest champagne house, as well as Givenchy, Guerlain, Marc Jacobs and Céline.
In 2010, when the French stock-market watchdog, the AMF, announced its investigation into how Arnault acquired his 17% of Hermès shares, it warned it would be "long, difficult and very complex". The inquiry has sparked three years of claims and counter-claims between the luxury giants.
A leaked AMF report carried in Le Monde claimed LVMH, which has since built up its holding to 22.6%, had been increasing its stake in Hermès since 2001 through subsidiaries using the code name Mercure, investing amounts too small to require disclosure. LVMH said it would "vigorously" contest the claims.
Last July, Hermès launched a lawsuit "contre X" – against unknown persons – for insider trading and complicity in insider trading. LVMH countersued for "blackmail, false accusation and unfair competition".
Patrick Thomas, joint chief executive of Hermès, told French journalists that LVMH's emergence as a shareholder was neither "desired, nor desirable" and was against stock exchange rules: "The small Hermès shareholders would not have sold [their shares] had they known LVMH was behind the attack." At a final hearing at the end of May, the two sides were still slugging it out. The AMF's decision is expected by the end of June.
Thomas, who will hand over the reins to Axel Dumas, 42, a sixth-generation member of the Hermès family, told French news channel BFMTV: "We must not have someone who is a rival and perhaps a threat holding too-significant capital. From the beginning we have said that the way that LVMH got into Hermès is, and I'm measuring my words, illicit." Thomas has even suggested that LVMH's withdrawal from Hermès is "in the interests of France".
LVMH has repeatedly argued that its actions were perfectly legal. Vice-president Pierre Godé said: "It is not for a publicly listed company to ask whether it likes its shareholders or not. LVMH is a shareholder and asks to be treated like any other."
The humble espadrille – the rope-soled canvas shoe that originated as the hardy summer footwear of 14th-century peasants in the Spanish Pyrenees – is shaping up to be the surprise style hit of this heatwave.
At the online boutique my-wardrobe.com, buyer Georgina Coulter reports an 88% growth in espadrilles sales "in the past week, since the warm weather began".
Beyoncé recently posted online a snap of her feet in £355 Tabitha Simmons lace-up espadrilles. Cameron Diaz has been photographed in two different designer pairs (Celine leopardprint, Stella McCartney neon mesh) in the last week alone.
Emma Elwick-Bates, style editor of Vogue, wore black leather Chanel espadrilles to work and an industry cocktail party this week. "I do appreciate they sound ridiculous – they seemed particularly so when I bought them on a rainy day in January – but I always love it when something lowly or basic morphs, Cinderella-like, into a fashion staple.
"They are office-appropriate in leather, and brilliant for when the sun shines and you haven't managed to get a pedicure."
Kate Phelan, creative director of Topshop, has also been spotted in this season's Chanel espadrilles.
The espadrille has not been this hot since Don Johnson wore a pair – in white, to match his suit – in Miami Vice in the 1980s. This time around, the revival began 18 months ago when Valentino sent black lace espadrilles onto the catwalk to accompany the spring/summer 2012 collection. A summer later, Valentino's idea has spread to other catwalks, and to the high street.
Ruth Chapman, joint CEO of MatchesFashion.com, has been wearing the £150 Prism espadrilles stocked by the boutique this season to work this week. "Comfort really resonates with our customer, and they are supremely comfortable. I live in them at the moment: in the city, they work well with trousers and a chic shirt."
Chapman points to the fad last year for gentlemen's club-style velvet slippers – replacing ballerina flats – as laying the groundwork for the espadrille trend. "The espadrille is a move on from the slipper. The last is higher, but the fabric is softer." The temperature, says Chapman, is less of a motivator for her business, as "our customer is driven more by fashion than by the weather".
A backlash against the once-ubiquitous flip flop is also a factor. Five years ago, a worldwide craze for Havaiana flip flops from Brazil raised the cachet of the rubber and plastic sandal to a point where they became a common sight in offices in cities all over the world. Since then, a backlash against near-naked feet as business attire has driven them back to the beach. Chapman says a flip flop feels "too slovenly" for work; Elwick-Bates "doesn't really feel sandals are quite right" for the office. The covered-up espadrille provides an age-old solution.
Developments in technology and design are also driving the trend. Christian Louboutin currently has a studded, slingback espadrille retailing for £355, while at the other end of the price scale high street retailer Asos reports "a real shift away from the traditional basic espadrille in canvas as the demand moves towards fashion palettes and fabrics. Chambray, crochet, colour-blocking or tie-dye are all working very well."
Summer's fashion fads have a tendency to burn out fast. But the espadrille, which has survived most of its 700 years in the fashion wilderness, may be back for a while. At the Dolce & Gabbana showroom, where first viewings of the pre-collections for spring 2014 are now taking place, new styles are already doing brisk business.
When the walls of Rana Plaza collapsed on top of her, Saima Aktar was knocked unconscious. She woke in hospital to find she had lost control of her legs.
"When I look down I can see them," said the Bangladeshi seamstress, 23. "But I can't feel them or move them. I wish I had died."
Aktar is one of the hundreds of garment workers who suffered debilitating injuries when the Rana Plaza complex came down outside Dhaka on 24 April, killing at least 1,127 people. The authorities say they are yet to compile a full tally, but experts estimate that about half of the 2,500 people estimated to have been rescued may have to cope with long-term disability.
Aktar is being treated for spinal cord injury at the centre for the rehabilitation of the paralysed (CRP), a specialised medical centre down the road from Rana Plaza, funded by Britain's Department for International Development (DfID).
"She is paralysed from the waist down and will be in a wheelchair for the rest of her life," said Shamima Aktar, a physiotherapist at CRP. "It's very difficult for a disabled person in a country like Bangladesh, where few buildings have ramps and even the simple act of getting on a bus becomes a major challenge."
The human toll of the Rana Plaza accident has sent shockwaves around the world, focusing attention on the lives of the country's 4 million garment workers. Bangladesh has faced pressure to clean up the industry and the US has threatened to withdraw duty-free access.
But after visiting Rana Plaza survivors at CRP on Wednesday, Alan Duncan, Britain's minister for international development, called the £13bn a year industry "a massive success story that must not be allowed to go sour".
Duncan stressed that the garment industry was vital for Bangladesh's development, and said safety standards must catch up with its rapid growth.
"The industry has been built from nothing in the past 30 years and now needs to be turned into a long-term development success," he said, pointing out that garments directly support up to 4 million jobs, 80% of which are filled by women.
"This has a significant social impact, bringing job opportunities to many for the first time," he added.
Duncan announced that Britain would provide £18m in aid to improve productivity and safety in Bangladeshi garment factories.
DfID officials said the money would go towards establishing a programme of skills and safety training for 100,000 low-skilled garment workers.
Duncan said Rana Plaza was a wake-up call and that the Bangladesh brand was in danger as a result.
"Bangladesh lacks the capacity to police employment rights, health and safety measures, and building standards," he said. "The result is a tragedy like Rana Plaza. Regulations and enforcement need to catch up with the rapid growth of this sector."
The factories in the ill-fated building, which was built without necessary permits, were producing clothes for major western brands including Britain's Primark and Matalan.
Duncan insisted that high-street brands must assume responsibility for their products. "The duty of care extends from the store right back to the sewing machine, and the UK is ready to help make this happen," he said.
As Duncan visited the area, garment workers and the families of Rana Plaza victims staged a protest at the site of the accident. They clashed with the baton-wielding policemen who tried to disperse them.
Babul Akter, who heads the Bangladesh Garments and Industrial Workers Federation, said the UK should put pressure on the Bangladesh government to allow workers to unionise freely, and to stop the harassment of labour activists.
"Rana Plaza must be a turning point and friendly governments must make sure we don't return to business as usual," he said.
Duncan's visit follows a letter to British companies in Bangladesh from Justine Greening, the UK development secretary, inviting them to a dialogue on raising standards in garment production.
Existing UK support to improve conditions in the garment industry includes the Ethical Trading Initiative (ETI), which brings together businesse, trade unions and voluntary organisations, all of which sign up to a code based on International Labour Organisation standards.
The ETI has 70 members companies, including retailers such as Tesco, Next, Primark, River Island, Marks & Spencer, and John Lewis, many of whom source clothes from Bangladesh.
Although many brands have said they are under pressure to reduce exposure to Bangladesh in the wake of the Rana Plaza collapse, others say they viewed their presence in Bangladesh as a long-term commitment.
A Tesco spokesperson said: "It is the responsibility of all retailers to help [Bangladesh] change in a positive way, a way which sustains and improves the livelihoods of all those who work in the industry. If multinational retailers left, it would damage the industry, the economy, and ultimately the people who rely on it."
Lying in the bed next to Aktar at CRP, Rashida Begum, an 18-year-old sewing machine operator who had both her legs amputated, said she wanted outside support to help her get on with her life.
"I can never walk again," she said. "But I hope the buyers that I made clothes for will help me get artificial legs and rehabilitate me. My body has been shattered but I still want to make something of my life."
This is Graduate Fashion Week, giving us our pick of shrouds, wimples, gimp masks, cloven shoes, S&M lederhosen, three-legged trews, sheer burqas, male mouth merkins, broken china bodices and lumpen pocketing. Young designers will be joyously caught enumerating influences that encompass "macramé, Aung San Sui Kyi's confinement garb and Bert Reynolds' early oeuvre". Oh, how our pretension cup runneth over.
But Ab Fab platitudes aside, fashion is no mere frippery. As an industry, it receives virtually no help from government, beyond the odd, SamCam-starring, No 10 shindig, yet is worth billions. Specifically, £21bn according to The Value of the UK Fashion Industry, a report commissioned by the British Fashion Council in 2010 that attempted to quantify the economic and social impact of this most elegant industry for the first time.
"Frivolous" fashion is the nation's second biggest employer, and the largest employer of all the creative industries, directly responsible for 816,000 jobs. Its business is similar in scale to food and drink, generating more than twice as many jobs as real estate, and considerably more than car manufacturing, telecommunications and publishing put together. Moreover, it boasts obvious knock-on effects for tourism and financial services.
Non-aficionados who have endured some of the less impressive shows know them to boast all the tedium and self-importance of a school play. However, as a whole, London Fashion Week is justly recognised as the most innovative and creative of fashion's four major weeks, and the place where new careers tend to take flight (even if this is a euphemism for "people leave to make money"). According to the most recent figures, it is estimated to have a tourism impact of £98m, making £20m a year for the capital and drawing in orders of £100m. High fashion alone is worth £450m per annum.
There are not many areas in which Britain can claim to lead the world, but fashion is one of them. Students compete from all over the globe to become alumni of Central Saint Martins, the Royal College of Art and London College of Fashion. As countries become more moneyed, so they strive to be more exquisitely clad, meaning that Britain has the eye of Russia, China, India and Brazil for sartorial and investment purposes.
This week's Graduate Fashion Week alone will bring together more than 1,000 BA graduates from 40 UK establishments, in addition to collections from 16 universities around the world, including New York's Parsons and Fashion Institute of Technology, plus colleges from Turkey, Pakistan, Israel, Taiwan and the major European countries. And, in an age where the number of unemployed 16- to 24-year-olds sits at a million, many will be flocking to its job zone, where business skills can be honed to match creativity.
Sartorially speaking, the French may be stereotyped as chic conservatives, Italians witty sensualists and the Yanks sporting. We, meanwhile, have style, street up and catwalk down. From Beau Brummell giving the world the suit, to today's poster dandy Prince Charles with his double-breasted backing of the wool trade, Britain's men and women have cut a dash. Whether prim or punk, pretty in pink or stalwart in green, white and violet, Mary Barton's millworkers or Mary Portas's pants, it is we who have given substance to style.
Particular to the British character would appear to be a collective determination that freedom of expression rules, boundaries being there to be broken. We combine consummate craftsmanship (textiles and tailoring) with a sense both of the sublime and the ridiculous, frequently achieved simultaneously. As totalitarian regimes teach us, freedom to dress is no small indication of wider liberties. Britain's status as the mother of democracy allows it to be the great mothf*cker of fashion.
Our clothing conveys messages beyond mere adornment: is political as it is decorative. Witness the elaborate sumptuary laws dictating Tudor court costume currently on display at Buckingham Palace. Charles II's decision to avoid ostentatious dress following the interregnum was intensified by the material losses and anti-French feeling in the wake of the Great Fire of London; restraint that forced Pepys and Co into the waistcoat.
Fashion is not, then, something either to castigate female politicians for or be eschewed by the male. It is not only size 0 debates, or Dove campaign anxieties. For, amid this week's spats and spangles, hessian and herringbone, something brilliantly British will be taking shape.
Just two months after ruling out a move online, the budget fashion chain Primark has announced a partnership to sell a selection of its clothes through Asos.
Primark said it had begun a "very limited trial" of 20 womenswear products, ranging from a £6 Airtex T-shirt to a £22 studded parka. A spokesman said the trial would give the company "some insight into online retailing".
The partnership with Asos comes after George Weston, chief executive of Primark's parent company, Associated British Foods (ABF), again ruled out Primark launching its own online operation. He said Primark would prefer customers to "keep toddling down to Oxford Street" rather than sit at home buying fashion online.
"It is enough for us to have great fashion in good locations at the right price. That simply works for us," he said in April, when the company reported a 24% increase in sales. "We don't have a problem that needs fixing."
The brand is likely to do well on Asos. When rival New Look launched on the online retailer's site last year, it swiftly became one of its top-selling labels.
Maureen Hinton, an analyst at Verdict Retail, tweeted: "Great coup for #ASOS to get #Primark online – think how much more traffic it will drive to its site! And [it] will widen #Primark's international audience even more."
The switch from the high street to online shopping is having a big impact on retailers. The internet now accounts for about a fifth of retail sales.
Shoppers are spending almost double the amount online they were a decade ago, according to research by Broadbandchoices.co.uk. The average monthly spend on internet shopping has gone up from £56 to £113 a month, and more than a third of respondents said they did most of their shopping online rather than on the high street.
The John Lewis store group said in April that its online trade topped £1bn a year and accounted for a quarter of sales. Tesco has all but halted plans for more big out-of-town stores and Marks & Spencer opened a vast new warehouse last month in an effort improve its online service.
Debenhams reported a 46% surge in internet trade in its most recent six months, while Next Directory sales rose nearly 9% in the spring at a time when sales in its high street stores were down nearly 2%. Fashion sales are one of the fastest-growing internet sectors.
Despite its new interest in the internet, Primark said its priority remained rolling out new stores across the UK and mainland Europe. The company has 257 stores across Europe, 161 of them in the UK. It recently agreed to move into France with a store opening in the Grand Littoral mall of Marseilles. A second store will follow in Dijon.
A spokesman for Asos said Primark had joined it "as part of our roundup of great British high street brands. With their unique take on the latest must-haves and newest trends, Primark fans can get their hands on their award-winning affordable fashion, from skinny jeans and denim to skater dresses and printed T-shirts."
Asos said Primark was part of the mix of brands "relevant to its 20-something target market". The online retailer reported a 37% increase in sales in the three months to the end of February.
Asos (an abbreviation of As Seen On Screen) was founded by Nick Robertson, a great-grandson of the suit-maker Austin Reed, in 2000 when he heard that 25,000 viewers had rung the producers of the TV show Friends, desperate to find out how they could buy some of the clothes featured.
ABF is due to update the City on trading next month, providing the first details about whether the Bangladesh factory collapse has affected sales.
The chief executive of Sir Philip Green's Arcadia clothing empire is to be put under pressure by the development secretary Justine Greening to commit to improving lives of workers making their products in the developing world in the wake of the disaster in Bangladesh.
Ian Grabiner, who has been Green's chief executive since 2009, is one of about 20 executives of high street clothing companies with supplies coming from Bangladesh who are being invited to a meeting with Greening, where she will urge them to work with the government to raise standards.
In April, 1,127 workers were killed in the collapse of the clothing factory in the Dhaka suburb of Savar. In a second incident three weeks ago, eight people were killed in a fire at a factory in the capital that was producing clothes for western retailers, including Primark.
At least 1,800 Bangladesh garment industry workers have been killed in fires or building collapses since 2005.
Arcadia, which owns Topshop, BHS, Evans and Dorothy Perkins, is yet to sign up an Ethical Trading Initiative (ETI) agreement between companies to impose a code of labour practice on all their suppliers, although Arcadia has agreed to sign an accord on fire and building safety in Bangladesh.
Eight other high-street retailers – Matalan, Aurora Fashions, Peacocks, Shop Direct, Hobbs, French Connection, Karen Millen and Austin Reed – whose executives have been invited to the meeting with Greening, have also failed to sign the ETI and will come under pressure to do so. Arcadia has previously said that it enforces its own code of conduct on suppliers, and that Bangladesh represents only a small percentage of its supply chain.
Greening told the Observer: "The Department for International Development will work with companies to see how we can take the next step, whether it's signing up to ethical trading standards or going the extra mile in ensuring responsible business practices."
The call comes before a visit this week by Alan Duncan, the minister for international development, to Bangladesh, which will include talks with the Dhaka government on how the UK can support improvements in building standards.
An official investigation in Bangladesh found that causes of the disaster included the swampy ground that the factory was built on; the "extremely poor quality" construction materials; and the massive, vibrating equipment operating when the eight-storey building collapsed.
A committee appointed by the Bangladesh government to investigate the event recommended life prison sentences for the owners of the building and of the five garment factories that operated there, though the charges they currently face carry a maximum seven-year term.
Since David Cameron's cabinet reshuffle, when Greening was moved from transport to international development, she has made economic development a priority for her department. In a speech in March she said: "I want to see an end to aid dependency through jobs. I believe Britain can be a force for good. I also believe British business can be."
A spokesman said: "The government is talking to the Bangladesh government about helping to improve building regulations, but there is more we can do. We want to work with businesses to keep up the momentum for change."
Other companies whose chief executives have been asked to attend the meeting with the development secretary include Sainsbury's, Marks & Spencer, John Lewis, Next, Debenhams, New Look, Mothercare, Monsoon, Accessorize, Asos, Burberry and River Island. A statement on Arcadia's website says: "We do not own or operate factories and Arcadia Group is rarely dominant in an individual factory. We have strong working relationships with our network of international suppliers, 48% of which have been with us for three years or more.
"Arcadia brands work with around 700 suppliers that manufacture our goods in approximately 1,060 factories. The top 20 suppliers provide 44% of our goods."
Writer and TV presenter Emma Woolf's The Ministry of Thin is about "how the modern obsession with weight loss, youth, beauty and perfection got out of control". Woolf sets her stall out with brio.
"Welcome to the Ministry of Thin. All members are welcome and there's no charge – in fact you're signed up automatically at birth." While Woolf is not advocating obesity, she points out that "thin rules" are no longer the sole preserve of people with food disorders (Woolf detailed her own 10-year battle with anorexia in her previous book, An Apple a Day, and also in a newspaper column). Women routinely place weight loss above all other goals – in one study, one in six women would rather be blind than obese. Woolf describes the Ministry of Thin as an "internal policeman", observing: "There is still a consensus what women should look like; a near-universal acknowledgement that a thinner body is a superior body. How can we be so strong and yet so idiotic?"
From there, Woolf (great-niece of Virginia, whom she quotes a couple of times) makes her way through the other "ministries": food, fat, diet, fashion and beauty, gym, sex, surgery and more. The picture she paints verges on Orwellian – with everyone (but mainly women) governed and dominated by internal and external pressures to conform. Woolf studies the morality we attach to food choices, the influence of affluence, what I'd term the fiction of perfection that permeates the average female life.
Occasionally it's as if nothing is allowed to be good news. Even the female athletes from the Olympics are fretted about as "impossibly perfect in their own way". (Let us remind ourselves that Jessica Ennis got fit to win, not to make other women want her glutes.) Elsewhere Woolf is uncharacteristically catty about Alexa Chung: "That high fashion Alexa body – all ribs and hips, without an ounce of flab – probably works better dressed than undressed." (Miaow!) No sign here of the Woolf wistfully imploring women in the concluding chapter: "It's a cliche, but we are stronger when we are together." Erm, quite.
However, such snipes are random occurrences. Woolf is robust on a range of issues, not least normal women ageing into "invisibility", juxtaposed against the relentless "surveillance" of famous females.
Elsewhere, she rails against modern plastic surgery ("violence disguised as choice") and the disturbing new trend for "vaginal tightening" and "labia correcting" inspired by porn. After a young male acquaintance turns out never to have had a sexual partner with pubic hair, Woolf recoils at the relentless "pornification" of the female form. "An actual woman's body is more exciting – more challenging and erotic – than the airbrushed pornified version ever could be."
Throughout the book, Woolf's anorexia looms large, a veritable "dark passenger", filtering through many issues, ranging from ageing and self-image to sex and fertility. Woolf readily admits to being full of contradictions, frequently unconfident and unsure, which (digs at Alexa aside) steers her safely away from hectoring, superior and priggish towards a more appealing, human questioning tone, that only occasionally falls down the rabbit hole of woolly and meandering. Is there much that is genuinely new in The Ministry of Thin? Perhaps not. However, Woolf's skill in is in adding intellectual and emotional ballast to the debates that interest her. In its best moments, this book emerges as a hypnotist's finger-click signalling women to wake up. As Woolf asks: "If being thin is the answer – what is the question?"
Luxury brands come before French stock-market regulator in dispute over Bernard Arnault's stake in Hermès
With graduate fashion week opening in London on Sunday, expect the usual front-page grabbing designs – voluminous neon trousers, fur gimp masks and tents worn as dresses – from the latest generation of young talent. But this year the four-day event also has something different, with a focus on getting these graduates into the fashion workforce after their moment in the spotlight.
There are around a million young unemployed people aged 16 to 24 and graduate fashion week is attempting to prevent that figure increasing. It has introduced a job zone, where participating graduates can find advice about everything from interviews to writing a business plan, and has added awards beyond design, for disciplines such as media and marketing.
"Not all graduates are going to be designers," said Rob Templeton, chair of GFW since 2011. "We wanted to show the different options available."
Set up in 1991 by designer Jeff Banks, the event has helped launch successful names including Stella McCartney and Christopher Bailey in its 22-year history. This is the sort of career trajectory dreamed of by most of the 5,500 design graduates emerging from BA courses this year. Templeton is there to bring them down to earth. "Young designers think they only want to work for a brand in Milan or London but the reality is very few people succeed in doing that," he said. "There are lucrative jobs to pursue – pattern-cutting is a great skill that's in demand."
While the next McCartney may be more likely to come from renowned MA courses at Central Saint Martins and the Royal College of Art, both of which have their own shows, GFW provides a space for colleges outside London. Bournemouth, Bath Spa, Kingston, Manchester and Northampton are among the universities participating, with Kingston seen as a particularly good course. They will be joined for the first time by international colleges including Parsons, the American design college that counts Marc Jacobs and Donna Karan among its alumni.
With representatives of Abercrombie & Fitch and Ralph Lauren attending last year, the international reach of GFW is increasing and Chinese suppliers are expected this time. The focus is on developing the event from a day out for members of the public – although they can still buy tickets for the shows – to a place to do business.
This is something insiders approve of. Alice Smith, a partner in recruitment consultants Smith & Pye, which has worked with brands from Gap to Louis Vuitton, attends GFW regularly to find new talent. "It's been a public event and it needs to be industry-facing," she said. "A new team are working to turn that around."
But while 62 people have been hired by GFW sponsor George since last year, a good number of those have been internships and placements, and Smith said she rarely places someone in a job straight out of college.
As in many industries now, internships, often unpaid, have become essential to getting a paid job in fashion. Emily Button, a Bath Spa design graduate who showed her final collection at GFW last year, said the images of her collection on the runway provided an "amazing talking point" in interviews but ultimately it is work experience that counts. She is now coming to the end of a year-long paid internship at Roland Mouret. Previous internships at MaxMara and Jasper Garvida – completed while at college – helped her get there. "It's about anything that will give you the edge," she said. "Those experiences put me in a better position to get a better internship when I graduated."
Templeton added: "Graduates who have done internships are 50%-60% more likely to get a job. We're trying to instigate that across more colleges so it's more a part of courses." He has plans for workshops to support graduates throughout the year and mentoring programmes online. "We want to make graduate fashion week a home for students and the industry," he said. "Things like this can make a real difference and we can show other industries new approaches in the process."
The luxury French fashion label Hermès prides itself on assisting wealthy people who have run out of gift ideas: Nicolas Sarkozy once gave Barack Obama a €6,000 (£5000) black Hermès golfing bag, the Duke of Windsor ordered a custom-made patent leather wheelbarrow for Wallis Simpson and the Queen was once known to be very fond of the label's gloves. But when it comes to offering itself on a plate to eager tycoons building fashion empires, Hermès is rather more circumspect.
The family firm, which began as a harness-maker in the 19th century and is the last major independent luxury fashion house to resist the onslaught of multinationals and conglomerates, has escalated a dispute known as the "handbag wars" that has shaken the Paris luxury goods world.
The standoff between Hermès and its rival LVMH, the owner of Louis Vuitton and Dior, was played out at a hearing before France's stock market regulator on Friday amid allegations of secret takeover plots and sneaky bids for world domination.
The dispute began in 2010 when it emerged that LVMH, owned by Bernard Arnault, France's richest man, had secretly acquired a 17% stake in Hermès that has now risen to 22%. Hermès, run by the sixth generation of its founding family, is fiercely protective of keeping family control. It said it was stupefied to discover Arnault had built up the stake using a system that masked his true identity. It feared it was under attack by a businessman who had secretly spent 10 years trying to take it over. The company said there was "an intruder in the garden but we don't want him in the house".
The stock market watchdog can impose sanctions on Arnault if it finds his stake-building did not comply with market rules. Hermès also filed a legal complaint against LVMH for alleged insider trading and manipulation of share price. LVMH swiftly filed a counter complaint for slander, blackmail and unfair competition. The French media has likened the case to a thriller against a back-drop of a luxury goods market where a crocodile purse can cost more than a car.
LVMH's lawyers told the hearing the case was "dysfunctional", "unfair" and should be thrown out, saying it had done nothing wrong, and complaining of a "smear campaign and slander".
Hermès has defied the financial crisis with growing sales and continues to defend its painstakingly slow, handmade fashion. Its artisans train for three years before stitching their first clutch and its bags have waiting lists rumoured to be years long, including the Kelly, named after Grace Kelly who once famously shielded herself from paparazzi with a Hermès handbag, and the Birkin, created after the British actor Jane Birkin bumped into a Hermès executive on a plane and complained the Kelly wasn't big enough for everyday use. Recently a vintage crocodile Birkin fetched a record €63,800 at auction in Paris.
Arnault has rarely been out of the headlines in France. His recent application for Belgian citizenship caused outrage and political debate over tax and inheritance issues in France, before he told Le Monde he was staying put and had never intended to stop paying tax in France. A close friend of Sarkozy, he built his empire by spotting family tensions, and buying companies such as Louis Vuitton and Moët & Chandon from their founding families. This is not his first "handbag war" – he also had a failed standoff over Gucci with rival French businessman François Pinault.
If the stock market watchdog rules against him, in a decision expected later this summer, he could be fined millions of euros, a drop in the ocean of LVMH's net 2012 profit of €3.42bn. But LVMH is determined to keep its stake in Hermès.
Last week the Colbert committee of 75 French luxury houses, including Hermès and Dior, complained that the image of insecurity on Parisian streets, including wealthy Chinese tourists being attacked by pickpockets and thieves, was threatening the luxury fashion industry.
It remains to be seen whether the Hermès-LVMH dispute, now likely to continue for years, will also affect the luxury brands' image.
For grown-up high street chic, French brands like Sandro, Maje or the Kooples always deliver, says Imogen Fox
Boden is a very British fashion brand whose fans include David and Samantha Cameron. But now the label, known for its stripy T-shirts and sunny prints, is gearing up to challenge TopShop and Gap for international profile.
It already has dedicated websites and catalogues in the US, Germany, France and Austria as well as the UK, and shoppers from more than 50 countries buy the brand through those channels. Over the next 12 months, Boden wants to boost sales with targeted websites, and potentially catalogues, in new territories, which are likely to include Scandinavia, the Netherlands, Belgium and even Australia.
Overseas sales are already worth more than those in the UK, with the US alone making up a third of the business. Johnnie Boden, the name and brains behind the brand, says: "Businesses are like flowers, they either grow or die. While I'm around there will never be any thought that we will stand still."
As it is unwilling to compromise on quality and design in order to trim prices, or to expand into new product areas where it is not an expert, Boden's potential growth in the UK is limited, so overseas expansion is the only way forward.
Johnnie Boden, who behaves like a terribly polite but excited puppy trapped in a blond military man's body, admits that when he started the business with an inheritance from an uncle in 1991, there was little sign it would become an international brand. "To be really frank, I was just very pleased to have a job that I enjoyed. Until then my career had been a complete disaster."
After an education at Eton and Oriel College, Oxford, Boden's first job was as a stockbroker, during which time, he has said, "every share I recommended went down". When a childless uncle left him some money, Boden took the chance to move on, having a go at running pubs and teaching before finally launching a hand-drawn catalogue of men's clothing aimed at his former banking pals.
Boden, who never misses a chance to highlight his weaknesses, says he got just about everything wrong in the early years, from designing bad products to hiring the wrong staff. He ran out of money and was forced to remortgage his house, but despite his self-declared incompetence, enough shoppers liked the clothing that he was able to launch womenswear and later children's clothing, before finally stabilising the business financially in about 2000.
Today Boden seems almost shocked by the success of the brand in the US, where it is enjoying double-digit percentage increases in sales despite the economic downturn. Sales reached about $150m there last year and the aim is to build a $500m business in the US within four or five years, about equal to Boden's total sales last year.
So many British retailers have seen their dreams crushed in the giant US market that Boden planned carefully for potential defeat when it first tested the water in 2002. "We studied the failures and successes of other British brands. We learned it was incredibly important not to bet the farm. We had no employees or swanky offices in Manhattan. We did everything from here. What we hadn't really planned for was success," Boden says.
In the last couple of years, Boden has had to turn that around, investing about £2m to double the size of a US warehouse and set up a marketing office in Boston.
The dream is to create a truly international brand and Boden says that success in other markets, particularly Germany, where sales are currently rising by more than 20%, shows that the label resonates with middle-class women around the world. "My wife will laugh at this, but I do have a feel for what 40-year-old women like. I think like the customer," says the 51-year-old Boden.
Having handed over the running of the business to managing director Julian Granville some years ago, Boden says his role is to be "the ultimate brand guardian", making the final decision on designs and ensuring service and quality is up to scratch.
But it's a highly competitive market and Boden admits that his brand faces increasing competition, particularly in childrenswear, where families are now less willing to spend £12 on a child's T-shirt, no matter how cute the design.
In the UK, sales growth has slowed as even Boden's relatively well-off shoppers, with a typical household income of £70,000, are feeling the economic strain. The company has responded by cutting the price of its cheapest items, such as T-shirts, by about 20% and improving services such as delivery. Boden admits: "This year has not been as great as it should have been."
Profits fell 45% to £17.9m on sales of £245.9m in 2011 – the latest figures – amid tough conditions and a big increase in the price of cotton, which is widely used in Boden clothes. But growth abroad and lower cotton prices lifted profits again last year, although the company will not reveal by how much.
Boden, who is estimated to be sitting on a £320m fortune according to the Sunday Times rich list, says he has no plans to sell his 60% stake (the rest is owned by former and current staff) or seek outside investment and wants to stay involved in the business "for as long as I'm good at it".
He would love his three daughters, now all teenagers, to have a role at the company. "Maybe they will want to be involved at some stage but there's no pressure: they must do what's right for them.
"Sometimes my wife gets fed up and says why don't you just sell it, but there's nothing else I'd rather do. If I wasn't doing this I'd be hanging around at home and we'd probably just argue and I'd become an alcoholic," he says, tongue firmly in cheek.
Luckily for his liver and his wife, building an international brand should keep Boden occupied for the next few years at least.
For grown-up high street chic, French brands like Sandro, Maje or the Kooples always deliver, says Imogen Fox
Where does a woman who has outgrown the British high street, yet balks at designer prices, shop? Sandro, that's where. Or Maje, or Zadig & Voltaire, or the Kooples. All French brands, all a bit pricier than Topshop or Zara, and all having a moment right now.
They share an identity that can be broadly defined as "chic rock'n'roll", selling a look that appeals to women who don't want to show off tons of flesh but can still order a strong margarita when the occasion demands. Women, for example, who are looking for a quality longer-line biker jacket to wear with their tailored skinny trousers.
The Posh French High Street Look (PFHSL) emerged about five years ago when the fashion industry began to pay close attention to what the fashion editors at Vogue Paris wore. The look was classic with a sexy edge and reasonably formulaic. The British high street, with its scatter-gun trends, couldn't quite deliver.
The success of the PFHSL lies in its consistency. Alexa Chung now fronts the Maje campaign, while grown-up lovers partying on date night haunt the Kooples' adverts. Meanwhile, Sandro's website offers even more clarity. Currently it is selling a jacket named the "Veste Vogue", a studded "Pull Sunday" and a pair of "jeans parfait". No translation necessary.
Fashion photographers can be terrible bosses – demanding, capricious, unreasonable. Tim Walker, whose work has for the past decade graced the pages of almost any glossy magazine you care to name, is nothing like that. But one look at his fantastical, ambitious photographs tells you that working for a man who thinks nothing of creating a dinner party suspended in a wood, or of crashing a giant doll through a forest, or of faking a snowdrift inside a stately home, could be a challenge. "I think an intense enthusiasm to create a vision you have seen in your head makes you ignore certain obstacles," is how the softly-spoken 42-year-old puts it.
Walker has a very specific take on fashion photography. His work is theatrical, bordering on surrealist and – to state the obvious about a man who once dyed Persian cats pastel – incredibly romantic. Every fantastical scene is created with props, and all the meticulously crafted tableaux existed at some point. Walker strives to create his pictures within what he calls "the parameters of the impossible" – something has to be physically, rather than digitally, possible for the picture to register with the viewer. "Otherwise the ring of truth goes flat."
All his photographs are instantly recognisable as Tim Walker pictures, whether they feature fashion models or not. He sees that as a positive: "If you are fortunate enough to acquire a style that is recognisable, you end up taking the same 10 pictures for the rest of your life, even if you think it's a new picture."
Walker's otherworldly work is being celebrated in an exhibition opening today at the Bowes Museum in County Durham. Tim Walker: Dreamscapes is curated by former Turner prize judge Greville Worthington, who believes the photographer's work can be read as "more than fashion". The exhibition shows Walker's influences from British surrealism and places him as an artist with roots in the traditions of English landscape painting. For Walker, the art tag is a welcome change: "I was never interested in fashion when I started out. I was interested in people. Fashion photography allowed me to explore dreams and fantasy, and that's what I love about it."
His career in fashion started early. As a 19-year-old intern at Vogue, he established its Cecil Beaton archive before studying art and photography at Exeter Art College. After graduating, he worked as a photo assistant in London before moving to New York to assist Richard Avedon. He shot his first Vogue story at 25, and since then has contributed to every leading glossy magazine. In doing so he has inspired multiple imitators and changed the course of fashion photography. His shoot at the 1998 Glastonbury festival, featuring campfires, supermodels, foil capes and muddy fields, is one of the most referenced in recent fashion history.
Despite contributing so much to the fashion conversation, Walker himself is particularly unfashiony. He dresses according to colour – head-to-toe blue or green – rather than in labels. His one accessory is a pencil poking, carpenter-like, from behind his ear. "I'm not motivated by the wheel of fashion and commerce," he says. For Walker, fashion is simply a giant dressing-up box.
His current work is less about lush tableaux and more about stripped-back portraits. The turning point came about four years ago, when a typically ambitious idea of painting the exterior of a cottage Post-it yellow to make it look as if it had been dipped in wax came unstuck thanks to three days of torrential rain. Rivers of yellow paint streaming down a Sussex village made Walker nostalgic for the relatively stress-free environment of the studio.
Not that Walker's portraits are simple. He can't quite bring himself to turn up to a shoot without a suitcase of props, but he wants the finished image to be less a quest to print out a vision he has in his head and more a collaboration with his subject. "That's why I love working with Tilda [Swinton] so much," he says.
Swinton is one of Walker's most photographed subjects. He regularly shoots a small group of women who he believes have a unique beauty. He cites the androgyny of Stella Tennant, the strangeness of Kristen McMenamy and the challenging looks of Karen Elson – once considered ugly, now recognised by the fashion industry as a great beauty.
Swinton is apparently a photographer's dream. "She is so involved in the pictures. She is vitally present and so involved in the characters that we are exploring – whether that's as Bowie's Thin White Duke mixed with the witch in The Wizard Of Oz or a character from a surrealist painting." She will, he says, "go there".
So who else is a joy to photograph? "Kate Moss. She has such a joy for life. You have never met anyone with such a sense of living 100% in the moment. And the camera loves the moment. Even though you might have spent ages in pre-production, it's still about a precise moment."
• Tim Walker: Dreamscapes is at the Bowes Museum, Castle Barnard, County Durham until 1 September; go to thebowesmuseum.org.uk for details.
If you're starting a fashion business, it seems that London is the perfect place to do it. The city was recently ranked fashion capital of the world for the second consecutive year by the American analytics company Global Language Monitor.
You can see why: students flock from all over the world to study at institutions such as Central Saint Martins, London College of Fashion and the new Conde Nast College of Fashion and Design, and the capital's thriving design scene makes it hard for fashion graduates to leave. According to Caroline Rush, the CEO of the British Fashion Council, many international students stay on to start up businesses in London.
The capital is far from the only fashion hotbed in the country. Manchester is to become the next destination of Vogue's much celebrated Fashion's Night Out event, which encourages consumers to shop in order to support the fashion industry in a tough economic climate; other Northern cities such as Leeds, Newcastle and York are also praised for the variety of shopping opportunities on offer.
But with recent figures showing a fall in retail sales, how can fashion startups thrive? And what does it take to start up successfully in the fashion sector?
We'll be hosting a live Q&A on starting up in the fashion industry on Thursday 23 May between 1pm and 2.30pm. We'll be looking at:
• How to find your niche and develop your brand.
• The help and advice available to fashion startups.
• Weighing up the benefits and disadvantages of online retail and selling in a physical shop.
• How small fashion retailers can compete with larger high street stores.
• Any other questions our readers have about starting a small fashion business.
Leave your questions or comments below and our panel will get back to you, or join us at 1pm on Thursday for the live discussion.
Lisa is responsible for increasing brand awareness and devising and delivering integrated marketing campaigns.
Caz is a Young Ambassador for The Prince's Trust. The Style Factory has a shop which sells new and vintage clothing and also runs fashion and craft workshops.
Prior to this role, Jon worked in the technology and e-commerce sectors.
Helen has a BA in Fashion from the Surrey Institute of Art and Design. She then worked in commercial brands before founding EKO in 2009.
Since 2004, Jake developed the business from selling dinner jackets from the back of a black cab into a successful label with shops all over the UK.
Tom advises a wide range of clients in the fashion industry, from up-and-coming designers to established, internationally known brands.
MyFashionShop.co.uk is a website offering fashion at prices suited to a student market.
Beverley started her business five years ago and opened the shop in Farnham, Surrey in 2010.
Paul used to be executive director of UK Fashion Exports. He is a representative on the all-party parliamentary group on trade and investment and the BIS Creative Industries Strategy Group.
This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To receive more like this you can become a member of the Small Business Network here.
Rana Plaza shows just how much traceable supply chains matter. We need to care about the people making our clothes, says Lauren Laverne
"What is a cynic? A man who knows the price of everything and the value of nothing." Oscar Wilde's famous quote keeps coming back to me at the moment. I have thought of it over and over in the wake of the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh. More than 1,120 bodies were removed from the rubble of the eight-storey complex. For some, the Rana Plaza tragedy is a matter of criminality, and indeed there have been multiple arrests, including engineers who are alleged to have illegally added several shoddily constructed floors to the building, and the factory owner who is said to have ordered employees to work the morning of the collapse, after safety concerns had been raised.
They may be directly culpable, but it is disingenuous to claim we are not connected to this tragedy. Government officials blamed the relentless thrum of industrial machinery for the building's collapse. For whom were the needles whirring if not us? Can you be sure nothing you own was sewn by one of the workers who went into the factory that morning and never came home? Me neither.
This week's column, therefore, is a plea to fashion producers for traceability of their supply chain, and a mention for brands and services which supply those things to consumers. Frustratingly, at the top end of the market that kind of accountability is easier to come by, but there's no reason the high street should be exempt from offering similar guarantees. As Lucy Siegle noted in this newspaper, big brands distancing themselves from the factories in which their goods are produced is part of their business model. It helps safeguard their profit margin. If consumers demand they become accountable in great enough numbers, they will.
The other half of the Wildean price-value aphorism is less frequently quoted, but worth bearing in mind: "and a sentimentalist… is a man who sees an absurd value in everything, and doesn't know the market price of any single thing".
Often the argument against buying fair trade (or introducing any kind of guarantees about the working conditions a garment was made under) is one of price. It may seem pompous to ask anybody to pay more than they might for a T-shirt, especially in times of financial hardship. But as garment workers' wages make up such a tiny fraction of the cost price of an item (around 1-3%), a small increase in price might improve their circumstances greatly.
At the moment, though, if you want to be sure the workers who made your clothes didn't suffer doing it, investing in fair trade is the only option. It may cost more, but the price of a garment isn't just the one on the tag – there is more than one kind of cost. How cheap is anything if someone dies to keep the price down?
The deaths of more than 1,100 garment workers when the Rana Plaza building in Bangladesh collapsed last month, as well as those at a Cambodian shoe factory on Thursday, have forced consumers and retailers to re-examine the impact and ethics of fast fashion.
Here we round up the best news stories, multimedia, teaching resources and websites to help you study the working conditions of garment workers and the sustainability of the fashion industry in the citizenship and geography classroom, and beyond.
Cambodia shoe factory collapse kills workers
On Thursday 16 May a ceiling came down at Wing Star Shoes plant in Cambodia, killing at least two people. The latest in a long line of industrial accidents killing workers in the fashion industry making garments for the west.
Fashion chains sign to help finance safety in Bangladesh factories
Will the collapse of the Rana Plaza building lead to a change in practice? Some of the world's biggest fashion chains, including H&M, Zara, C&A, Tesco and Primark, have signed up to a legally-binding agreement to help finance fire safety and building improvements in the factories they use in Bangladesh. The government in Dhaka has also announced plans to raise the the minimum wage for garment workers.
Eight top fashion retailers fail to sign Bangladesh safety accord
A number of retailers failed to put their names to a Bangladesh safety pact, including Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury's and New Look.
Bangladesh building collapse: woman rescued after 17 days speaks of ordeal - video
A woman found alive in the rubble of Dhaka's Rana Plaza after 17 days tells how she got rescuers' attention with a stick as she heard voices above her.
Bangladesh building collapse – pictures
Devastating photographs of the Rana Plaza collapse which killed more than 1,100 people in April 2013.
Fashion doesn't give a damn about garment workers
Thought-provoking comment piece by Lucy Siegle – author of To Die For: Is Fashion Wearing Out the World – which gives an insight into the fashion industry and how the world's 40 million garment workers work to try and complete near-impossible orders.
Was your T-shirt made in the Dhaka garment factory? You have no idea
Applying any ethical criteria is challenging when it comes to fashion – so isn't it time we had Fairtrade labelling for clothes?
Death in Bangladesh is too high a price for quick-fix fashion
Blog by 18 year-old fashion lover on how she has stopped buying cheap clothes. She points out teenagers' spending power is worth £7bn a year – imagine if that were channelled into buying fewer well-made clothes produced under fair wages.
Time for an international minimum wage
Bangladeshi writer Muhammad Yunus' insightful comment piece is great for sixth formers who want to delve deeper into the how foreign buyers can unite to lift workers out of 'slave labour'.
Desperate poverty behind the tragedy of Dhaka – The Day
An article from schools news service The Day on the terrible race to save victims in the worst recorded industrial accident in Bangladesh. The activity that goes with the article asks: are Western companies to blame?
Ethical clothing lesson
Excellent lesson written by citizenship and English teacher Charlotte Rashford which introduces the issues of sweatshop clothing factories. Also see the associated starter activity and group work plan.
Guide to becoming a Fairtrade school
Step by step guide to becoming a Fairtrade school including how to set up a steering group and adopt a Fairtrade policy.
Send my Friend to School PowerPoint
Many garment workers across the world are school-aged. This PowerPoint introduces the 2013 Send My Friend to School activities to primary school kids, including facts and figures and real life stories. Also find a PowerPoint for secondary.
Love fashion hate sweatshops
Some really interesting material here from the War on Want campaign for a fashion industry that respects workers' rights.
Blood, sweat and t-shirts
Six young fashion British lovers swap shopping for the factories and back streets of India, where they go to work making clothes and living with the workers - the result is a hard-hitting expose of the garment industry and the clips of each episode here are just tailor made to play in lessons.
Labour behind the label
A campaign that works to improve conditions and empower workers in the global garment industry. It's great site to explore, packed with advice, resources and action that can be taken.
In praise of sweatshops
It can be hard to find the pro-sweatshops view if your school debate club has to argue it. The Spectator kindly provides one in this blog by Alex Massie.
Anti-slavery campaign
Interesting info and action from this organisation which promotes the eradication of slavery and slavery-like practices, which include garment workers paid a pittance working in dreadful conditions.
Facts and figures on child labour by UNICEF
Many garment workers across the globe are children. Get the stats here.
For the Roth sisters, an open-minded approach to is key. Esther is the business brain behind Plümo, the brand she set up 15 years ago and where she was joined seven years later by her younger sister, Verena, who focuses on the creative side. Both have what Esther calls "a magpie eye – we love fairs and car-boot sales". It's a trait that's evident on the site, which sells a mix of independent designers, fair trade goods and artisan fashion.
There is a look, but it isn't about trends – it's about layering and easy-to-wear shapes. "I'm not a size 10, I'm a 14, and I want beautiful clothes that will last more than a season," Esther says. Plümo's hot item right now bears out this philosophy: a £95 "Sicilian" shirt dress is selling out "because of the oversized shape. It looks great with flat shoes, and you can easily wear it to the office or dress it up on holiday."
The Plümo woman has changed her habits in the recession. "Customers are happy to invest in something expensive, so long as it lasts more than a season." Her hot picks? The Carla bag, and a £300-plus  lace shrug ("People buy it for weddings to add zing to a more basic outfit").
Verena recommends 60s-inspired knits from Ganni, though she has a pressing sartorial issue to deal with: she's six months pregnant. How's her wardrobe coping? "I'm going for summer leggings with long tunics or boxy Baum und Pferdgarten T-shirts, because they're so easy to wear."
What every woman needs right now in her wardrobe is a "really good versatile skirt", Chapman says. Joint boss of the high-end boutique brand, which she set up 23 years ago with her husband, Tom, Chapman's skirt has to be one she can wear to work, then out to dinner with one of the designers Matches stocks. Most of us don't have quite the same lifestyle, but we are all looking for versatility. "Women will pay a high price for something if it has good value per wear," Chapman says, then lists the multiple uses of the timeless, ultra-flattering Dolce & Gabbana skirt she is wearing. "To work, for a dinner date, on holiday…"
Separates are big news this season. According to Chapman, that means ankle-baring trousers for some women, for others skirts that show a "degree of leg – but you don't have to stress too much about it". Hemlines that fall a few inches below the knee are perfect.
Chapman is the ultimate ambassador for keeping things simple. A classic white shirt is the perfect foil to this season's skirt. The aim is unflappable elegance, rather than office basic. "I'm wearing one of our Freda shirts with the sleeves rolled up. I prefer that to a short-sleeved shirt, because it looks cooler, more thrown together." Another piece of advice: "Search for a summer jacket in a navy blue or a blush colour, and it will see you through until winter."
Last, your summer wardrobe needs what is known as "an 80". "That's the heel height," she says: "80mm is the perfect height to walk in and yet still has that flattering leg thing going on."
What do women want? Alison Loehnis, the woman at the helm of Net-A-Porter, knows the answer straight away. "Newness – that's what drives sales. More than ever, they want the next season now."
With this in mind, smart customers are snapping up Isabel Marant's studded summer boots. "Summer boots are so practical in this climate. And these will feel totally relevant in the fall." (Although married into London life, Loehnis is half French and half American.) Midi skirts are another shrewd buy. "It's nice to show just a bit of tanned leg. And that hemline is a real coming trend." Her fastest sellers right now are Frame Denim jeans. "I have them in white, in a slim boyfriend fit and a black cropped version. They are the perfect midrise fit."
When it comes to her own wardrobe, Loehnis says, "I'm a jacket person. I'm a fan of a classic, very slightly shrunken blazer: it pulls together so many outfits. Biker jackets aren't going anywhere, either. And this season bombers are huge."
Working in the well-dressed Net-A-Porter offices, it is not surprising that Loehnis wears a heel "pretty much every day – anywhere from a 70[mm] to a 100[mm]." The Net-A-Porter team now numbers 2,000, so for days spent crisscrossing the 66,000 sq ft of offices, Gianvito Rossi pumps are a favourite.
For the summer holidays, she'll trade for Miu Miu parrot sandals. "And Mara Hoffman bikinis, which are amazing; and a Chloé white cotton macramé dress. Oh, and the Oscar de la Renta kaftans are sublime."
"Every woman needs an item jacket," Katie Starmer-Smith says: a posh-looking bouclé jacket that looks great with jeans or a dress. "It does that desk to dinner thing."
At 34, and a working mother of one, Starmer-Smith is the embodiment of the Atterley Road customer. Albeit one with bouncier hair and a nine-year career in fashion buying at Jigsaw behind her. She started thinking about the website in 2011, after feeling that certain shops on the high street were looking too young for her, and frustrated that her favourite boutiques didn't sell online. "It's the best of the high street mixed with harder-to-find boutique brands." Her mantra is "sophisticated chic style", but she is insistent that everything she sells should be affordable. And she's big on edited choice. "If I see 2,000 white shirts, I give up. Our customers are sophisticated, but time poor, so we offer a smaller choice."
Aside from the item jacket ("As comfortable as a cardigan, but better looking"), Starmer-Smith recommends boyfriend jeans (by Levi's Made & Crafted) and a long-sleeved printed dress by Scandinavian designer Julie Brandt. Flat silver sandals by Filippa K, which inject "daytime sparkle". And, for the enlightened and truly label-blind, Starmer-Smith recommends the Hobbs Victoria trouser. "The tailored silhouette makes them an easy way to wear patterned trousers. I wear mine with a white T, black tux jacket and statement heels."
Take a good look at the jeans Emma Fox is wearing. What you see before you is the shape of things to come: the boyfriend jean. "The skinny jean is still the best performer, but our Asos boyfriend style, the Brady, is doing really well. Especially the ripped version," says Fox.
Much as she loves fashion, it isn't the catwalk that motivates the Asos customer as much as the invites on her mantelpiece (or, more likely these days, in her inbox). "Our woman is very occasion-led, and that means dresses. We have a range of vintage-inspired lace dresses that are doing phenomenally well." Once a beach holiday is booked, that means more dresses and a bikini or two. "We're having our best season ever on swimwear, and it's all about the mix-and-match bikini."
The arrival of festival season also brings its own looks. "This year, dungarees are looking like the major festival trend. Both traditional denim dungarees and pinafore-style dresses, which girls are buying with crop tops. And jumpsuits – printed this year – and lots of crochet."
Summer usually means colour, but in 2013 the minimalist movement has taken hold at Asos: "Clean white separates and all-white dresses are doing better than we would have expected."
Fox also sees the influence of minimalism in the bestselling summer sandals. "The gladiator sandal isn't selling like it was last summer. The sandals that are doing really well are the simple two-part styles, either flat or with a heel."
You might expect the party line from The Outnet, the discounted previous-season little sister of Net‑A-Porter, to be that women want classic, timeless pieces. Quite the contrary: what Stephanie Phair has learned from the site's success is that "trends stick around longer than you'd think. When a good idea comes along, designers will play with it for several seasons."
Right now, soft pink is hot news. "Anything in that colour is flying," Phair says. "And that's a key colour for next season." Occasion dressing "for weekends away, and wedding guest outfits" is how many Outnet customers shop. "And the benefit of coming to a multibrand retailer is that you might start by viewing a brand you know, but end up finding something fantastic by a label you'd never have thought to look at." Phair's number one tip for online shopping: always filter by size. "In particular, on our site, which doesn't have every size in every item, this really speeds things up, so your hit rate is much better."
Sketch out a capsule wardrobe for summer 2013? "I'd start with a dress, because it's a ready-made outfit. A jacket that works with summery dresses is important, so you can wear it in the office and take it off for after-work drinks. We've got an Iris & Ink tailored cotton twill blazer." Your summer sandals may need an update because "this year's version is less embellished, and has a little blocky heel, instead of being flat."
In a holiday suitcase, Phair packs plenty of bikinis. "I take about five, which seems a lot, but it's the one time you can do an outfit change during the day, which is fun."
Launched in 2006, my-wardobe.com has always been about offering a choice of aspirational, but not intimidating, clothes. "Everyday luxury" is the brand's mantra. According to Curran, a "blended wardrobe" is how we dress now. "It's not about a split between working and weekend," she says. "It's either dressed up or dressed down."
For Curran, the "relaxed Riviera" look she's wearing would take her from a board meeting to a business dinner. Printed palazzo pants aren't the first item most women would choose for their working wardrobe but "I'm into things that can be worn in multiple ways, so I'd wear them on holiday, too, with a white vest."
Another unexpected Curran tip is a kaftan: "You can wear them over jeans and cropped trousers." Kaftan labels to investigate include the We Are Handsome brand. And her handbag tip is genius in its thrifty simplicity. "Buy a designer toiletry bag. They're great on holiday for sun lotions during the day, and double up as clutch bags for evening. Marc by Marc Jacobs do brilliant ones."
What other accessories should we buy now? "The mid-heeled classic is the shoe for the season," she says, then name-checks Duccio Venturi. She also recommends a statement bracelet: "If you dress down in your clothes, dress up in your accessories."
Her fail-safe shopping advice this summer? "Decide how you would use something first. And don't be rushed. That's when I've made mistakes, when I've bought something at the last minute."
Letters: Western retailers should display details of their full supply chain to consumers and invest in monitoring conditions
An international minimum wage, whether based on a percentage of the median country wage or on a rate set by international committees, could be destructive to emerging economies (A way to start healing the huge wound that Savar left, 13 May). Not only would such an initiative be costly to administer, but increased costs resulting from a higher minimum wage, and the corresponding incentive among producers to lower costs through automation, would reduce overall demand for labour in emerging economies. Not surprisingly, in the context of prevailing macroeconomic conditions and pent-up demand for low-cost production, the prospect of black market sweatshops becomes all too real.
The problem could be addressed at the other end of the supply chain. Western retailers should be required to display details of their full supply chain to consumers and invest in monitoring conditions at all stages. The "fair trade" concept could then be applied to all types of industries, allowing consumers the choice of paying a small premium on products produced in acceptable working conditions.
Piers Sanders, Vanina El-Khoury, David Faye, Cui Hailiang and Samsoo Oh
Cambridge Judge Business School
• Your article (Fashion chains sign deal for worker safety, 14 May), relating to a legally binding agreement in Bangladesh, is encouraging. However, it is shameful to read that famous retailers with huge buying power are not insisting on fair pay and conditions for an obviously exploited workforce, some of whom are paid as little as £25 per month. Assuming a machinist sews around 10 garments a day, that would be less than 10p per unit. If minimum wages were tripled to £75 per month (say 37p per hour), we would have to pay an additional 50p per garment, including a healthy margin. Ultimately, I blame the retailers for not laying down rules with their suppliers, who seem to care more about tax havens and shareholders with little thought for their hardworking employees.
Peter Connolly
Nottingham
I cried when I saw the photograph (warning: graphic content). Two people, one holding the other with eyes closed and skin dusted grey. A single, devastating moment in a disaster killing more than a thousand workers. But if the death toll is a statistic then this scene is a personal statement. Tenderness personifies the tragedy, and it is unbearable. Their lifeless embrace is the visible consequence of a world where consumerism comes above basics like safe working conditions.
It's the kind of image that echoes in the thoughts. It feels like it needs a response, an action, anything to make sure that this isn't just another unacceptable incident forgotten once the cameras move on. But what to do beyond signing a petition and hoping that the clothing brands relying on Bangladeshi production are listening? Continue shopping, with a sense of guilt over workers paid £25 a month ebbing with the allure of cheap T-shirts? Or stop buying?
For me, there is no need for a conscious boycott now because I made my decision two years ago. Around my 16th birthday I read Lucy Siegle's To Die For and decided that I no longer wanted to support a chain of exploitation reaching from cotton pickers to cutters and machinists. Flutters of moral uncertainty had been felt before, but this confirmed them. I was already avoiding the Arcadia group thanks to Philip Green's offshore tax arrangements, and so it felt easy to leave behind the rest of the high street too.
I was lucky, in that I didn't have to radically change my spending patterns. I already knew the delights of charity shops, vintage markets and the occasional scrum of a jumble sale. It was a habit nurtured by a minimal budget and the influence of my mum, who first introduced me to the thrill of the hunt for the unexpected. Some do not find a similar sense of joy in sifting through fleeces and bobbly jumpers in search of gems, but it worked for me. A decision first rooted in financial pragmatism and aesthetics became an ethical choice.
I love fashion. I adore the creativity of personal style and appreciate both the artistry of great designers and the contribution that the industry makes to the British economy. But a specific interest in sustainable fashion has become a central part of both my wardrobe and my writing (I regularly contribute to Oxfam and talk about the ethics of style on my own blog Clothes, Cameras and Coffee). Whenever possible I try to seek out alternative brands that emphasise sustainability. A while ago I bought a jumpsuit from Goodone. It has a Katharine Hepburn meets second world war land girl look, and I feel fantastic whenever I wear it. The process of choosing, saving up for and finally buying it made the eventual tissue-wrapped delivery all the more exciting. I'm also a big fan of Who Made Your Pants, a worker co-operative supporting female refugees through employment and development of skills. The knickers are gorgeous and the credentials even more so. A pair might seem expensive at first glance, but that's because the price reflects the true cost of good work. I'm not splashing out; merely buying less, choosing well and fully enjoying each purchase.
My way isn't the only solution. Labour Behind the Label stated that boycotting may not the best option, as many rely on the high street for work. However I have no desire, personally, to support any company whose labels were found in the rubble of the Rana Plaza building. These brands can now mend what they once ignored, but their flagship stores should be standing half-mast. Life is cheap when profits are high. Some brands have taken a step in the right direction by signing the Bangladesh fire and building safety agreement, but many have not. And until there is proof of a system that doesn't rely on exploiting the ones at the bottom, then my money will go elsewhere.
I am 18 next week. You may ask whether I shouldn't be focusing on other, more adolescent things than the origin of my clothes. But although my generation may have been bred on quick-fix fashion, we also have a great capacity to question it. Many are aware of what happened in Dhaka, but a combination of perceived powerlessness to change things and a desire for instant, cheap gratification keeps them shopping. Some don't care at all. But it's so important that the ones who do start being vocal about it. We're the consumers of both today and tomorrow, with decades of buying ahead. Teenagers' spending power alone is worth £7bn a year. Imagine how extraordinary it would be if a percentage of that were channelled into buying fewer well-made clothes produced under fair wages, with the assurance that no one had to die or suffer for the contents of our wardrobe.
Workers clear rubble following the collapse of a shoe factory in Kampong Speu, Cambodia, on Thursday. Officials say two bodies were pulled from the rubble, though other reports say six people died in the accident. An estimated 50 people remain trapped in the debris
At least eight of the UK's leading fashion retailers had last night failed to put their names to a legally binding initiative to offer financial support for fire safety and building improvements in the wake of the Bangladesh garment disaster.
George at Asda, Next, Matalan, River Island, Sports Direct, Peacocks, Shop Direct and the Arcadia group – which includes Topshop, Bhs and Dorothy Perkins – all failed to meet a deadline set by NGOs and labour leaders to sign the pledge.
The accord on fire and building safety in Bangladesh, which has been signed by H&M, Primark, C&A, Tommy Hilfiger, Calvin Klein, Zara and Tesco, aims to compel retailers to pay for rigorous and independent public inspections and blacklist any factories unwilling to comply.
Last night a handful of other retailers did sign up before the deadline, including Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury's, New Look and N Brown, a mail order and online retailer whose brands include High & Mighty, Marisota and figleaves.com.
The decision by the handful of retailers not to sign up was criticised by campaigners, who said it undermined any ethical initiatives the companies may have.
Sam Maher from Labour Behind the Label said: "I think they are running out of excuses. No company can say they have the interests of their workers at heart if they can't sign up.
"If H&M, Tesco and M&S can sign why can't Next and Arcadia? They have production in Bangladesh and have just as much responsibility to invest in those factories and ensure those workers are safe. Those that have signed have proved this is not an impossible demand.
"Are 1,200 dead workers not enough to make them realise something needs to be done?"
The Ethical Trading Initiative, the UK's biggest alliance of businesses, trade unions and voluntary organisations, which aim to improve working conditions, has recommended its members sign up to the accord. Debenhams, Next and George at Asda are all members of the ETI but have yet to sign up.
A spokesman for Debenhams said: "We fully agree with the intent of the agreement [however] we believe a collaborative approach to issues in Bangladesh is right. We continue to work through the Accord agreement and have provided feedback to the ETI."
The company sources less than 10% of its stock from Bangladesh and confirmed it had never used the collapsed Rana Plaza complex.
George at Asda, which is owned by US group Walmart, said about 20% of its clothes come from Bangladesh. George did not use the Rana Plaza building, but Walmart refused to confirm or deny whether it sourced clothes there, only saying that no "authorised" production took place there.
A spokeswoman said: "We are making investments into increasing wages, promoting female empowerment, supporting communities, health and safety initiatives and better working conditions."
Next declined to comment, but sources suggested the company could sign up later this week. The failure to meet the deadline by some of the biggest fashion names in the UK comes less than a day after the Bangladeshi government agreed to allow the country's 4 million garment workers to form trade unions without permission from factory owners.
Arcadia group, owned by billionaire Sir Philip Green, said it was unaware of the agreement and had not been approached by the ETI.
A spokeswoman said: "We are not members of the ETI but have our own robust and comprehensive ethical trading programme and a resultant code of conduct."
She confirmed that the company did not use the Rana Plaza building and it is understood the business has no plans to sign up.
Matalan, which used suppliers in the building as recently as February this year, said it would not be signing up to the agreement, but said it is part of a different non-binding agreement.
Philip Jennings, general secretary of UNI Global Union, which helped draft the proposals, said, "The clock is ticking for companies to show they care about their Bangladeshi supplier workforce. Their corporate reputations may be on the line but more importantly, so are the lives and livelihoods of these vulnerable factory workers in Bangladesh."
Shop Direct said it will not sign but is working with the International Labour Organisation instead. A spokeswoman added: "We trust their judgement and will continue to follow their actions closely."
Sports Direct declined to comment on the agreement but said a very small number of products come from Bangladesh. Peacocks and River Island were unavailable.
The most significant detail on the first womenswear range overseen by Belinda Earl, the new style director at Marks & Spencer, isn't the nod-to-Celine sorbet pink of the £85 coat that will hit stores in August, or the very-Victoria-Beckham just-below-the-knee-length dresses, or the on-trend kilt-styling of a tartan skirt.
In fact, it isn't visible at all, until you look at the inside of the clothes, and find that the overlocked seams usual on mass-produced clothing, and used by M&S until now, have been replaced by French seams in which the raw edges have been fully enclosed. The bold fashion message on which Belinda Earl is pinning her hopes of turning around the fortunes of Britain's biggest clothing retailer is about quality, not trend.
Earl's decision to pursue higher standards rather than high fashion is a big moment for M&S. While rivals Next and Primark are growing their sales, M&S is struggling – and its chief executive, Marc Bolland, hired three years ago with a £15m golden hello, is on the ropes.
M&S's clothing sales have been in decline for almost two years and if these new ranges don't fly off the rails his job will be on the line. Shareholders have given him until this winter to show his turnaround plan can work. There have even been rumours that an overseas buyer, possibly from the Middle East, will move in on the business.
Last night, the retailer revealed the collections to City analysts. Their reaction was just as important as that of the fashion press, which was given an early view. "We spent months in focus groups talking to customers," said Earl, "and the message was very clear. Women want quality, and they are encouraging us to reassert our leadership in bringing that to the high street. Often with focus groups you have to spend a long time unpicking the findings to work out what people are trying to say, but what was remarkable was how consistent the message was. Of course they want style, they want to look modern and relevant – we all do these days. But they still care about quality."
Earl, the former head of Debenhams and Jaeger hired to breathe new life into the ailing M&S clothing business, selects as her personal favourite from the collection an off-white single-breasted cashmere coat. At £229 it is far from cheap, but with the quality of fabric, fit and finish bearing up well in comparison with designer coats priced in five figures, it represents value for money for a customer prepared to invest.
The premium Autograph range, which had shuffled confusingly close to the main collection out of fear of higher price points, will now be premium once again: "Three-quarters of the fabrics in Autograph have been upgraded," says Earl. Cashmere in the main collection has been upweighted by 9% – but the price will be lowered by an average of £4 an item by ordering more and selling cashmere in more stores.
Bolland's future is now in Earl's hands – and those of the former head of the M&S food business, John Dixon. The store's upmarket food range, unlike its fashion, has been performing well. In January, Bolland also hired a new head of lingerie – Janie Schaffer from US chain Victoria's Secret – but she quit last month after falling out with Bolland.
In an industry driven by a constant desire for newness and a dizzying merry-go-round of trends, relying on relatively under-the-hood tinkering to turn around a crisis of the scale of the one facing M&S – which has reported a fall in clothing sales for seven consecutive seasons and is set to unveil a second consecutive year of declining annual profits next week – is a brave move.
But Earl insists the strategy "plays to the strengths of M&S. The quality of the shopping experience – from the shopfloor to how the clothes last – is what our heritage is all about. It's our DNA."
At ground level, the way the clothes are displayed is being updated to reflect how women now shop. There will be more outfits on mannequins, showing outfit ideas, and fewer crowded racks. "Three weeks ago we launched a 'Fashion Academy' so that the fashion messaging behind the collections is explained to the sales assistants, so that they can help customers."
Behind the scenes, M&S is trying to update its out-of-date distribution systems, which still rely on shop assistants counting clothes on the shop rails to assess stock levels. Three giant new clothing warehouses are being built so that online orders don't have to be gathered from 50 warehouses around the country before they can be sent. But the new behind-the-scenes systems won't help M&S if shoppers don't like the clothes.
Earl has overseen a leaner edit of catwalk trends. There are fewer pieces directly inspired by catwalk standouts, and more items designed with "wardrobe-building" in mind. "Our prints had become a little garish," admits Frances Russell, trading director for M&S womenswear, "so we have toned them down a little this season. We are thinking in a holistic way about what the customer already has in her wardrobe – monochrome pieces from last winter, for instance – and building on those."
Functionality and fit are as central to the notion of quality as fabric. "High heel tights" with a gel pad in the ball of the foot are a genuine lightbulb moment, while a "no-peep" white blouse with added buttons is a no-brainer. A washable silk blouse for £60, from the Autograph range, is a sound investment.
Success in womenswear is vital for M&S, because giving women a shopping buzz has a "halo effect" on homewares, childrenswear, food and menswear. Earl aims not only to shore up the traditionally strong categories of trousers, knitwear and underwear but to extend reach into coats and dresses, both of which are strong in this collection.
It remains to be seen whether customers deliver on their promise to prioritise quality over a fast fashion fix. But if they do – and it's a big if – this collection could be a high street gamechanger.
For Bangladeshis, the tragedy at the garment factory in Savar is a symbol of our failure as a nation. The crack that caused the collapse of the building has shown us that if we don't face up to the cracks in our own systems, we as a nation will get lost in the debris. Today, the souls of those who lost their lives in Rana Plaza are watching what we are doing and listening to what we say. The last breath of those souls surrounds us.
Did we learn anything at all from this terrible loss of life? Or will we have completed our duty by merely expressing our deep sympathy? What should we do, now that news of a deadly fire in another factory in Dhaka reaches us?
Important questions have been raised about the future of the garment industry. Pope Francis has said buyers are treating the garment workers like slave labourers. A very large foreign buyer, Disney, has decided to pull out of Bangladesh. Others may follow. If that happens, it will severely damage our social and economic future. This industry has brought about immense change in our society by transforming the lives of women. We cannot allow it to be destroyed. Instead, Bangladeshis must be united as a nation to strengthen the garment industry, and foreign companies must play their part too.
I propose that foreign buyers jointly fix a minimum international wage for the industry. This might be about 50 cents an hour, twice the level typically found in Bangladesh. This minimum wage would be an integral part of reforming the industry, which would help to prevent future tragedies. We have to make international companies understand that while the workers are physically in Bangladesh, they are contributing their labour to the businesses: they are stakeholders. Physical separation should not be grounds to ignore the wellbeing of this labour.
Of course, we have to be prepared for a negative market reaction. Some will argue that Bangladesh would lose the competitiveness it has gained by offering the cheapest labour. To retain its competitiveness, Bangladesh would have to increase its attractiveness in other ways, for example, by increasing productivity and specialised labour skills, regaining buyers' trust, and ensuring workers' welfare. But until we are able to fix an international minimum wage, we will not be able to pull workers from the grievous category of "slave labour" the pope placed them in.
Gaining support for the minimum wage won't be easy, but through sincere discussions with politicians, business leaders, citizens, church groups and the media in consumer countries, it can be achieved. In the past, I have tried to convince foreign buyers – but without success. Now after the Savar tragedy, the issue has gained a new urgency. I want to mobilise my international and Bangladeshi friends to make stronger and more persistent efforts this time. It wouldn't be necessary for all the companies to agree on the minimum wage at the same time. If some leading firms take the initiative, it would start the ball rolling.
There is also another practical way to help ensure better standards for Bangladeshi garment workers. Let's say a garment factory produces and sells a piece of clothing for $5, which is then packaged and shipped to New York. This $5 includes not only the production, packaging, shipment, profit and management but also indirectly covers the share that goes to the cotton farmers, yarn mills, and the cost of dying and weaving.
When US customers buy this item from a shop for $35, they feel happy that they've got a bargain. But everyone who was involved in the production collectively received $5. Another $30 was added in the US for taking the product to the final consumer. Now, with a little effort, we could make a huge impact in the lives of workers. Would a consumer in a shopping mall feel upset if they were asked to pay $35.50 instead of $35? My answer is no, they won't even notice. If we could create a Garment Workers Welfare Trust in Bangladesh with that additional 50 cents, we could resolve most of the problems workers face – safety, work environment, pensions, healthcare, housing, their children's health, education, childcare, retirement, old age and travel. Everything could be taken care of through this trust.
Bangladesh exports garments worth $18bn each year. If all the garment buyers accept this proposal, the trust would receive $1.8bn each year. That's $500 in the trust for each of the 3.6 million workers. All we have to do is to sell the item of clothing for $35.50 instead of $35. A barely noticeable change to the price could work wonders.
Of course, international buyers may argue that extra 50 cents would reduce the demand for the product and that their profits would shrink. But we would offer them an arrangement whereby their sales would go up, instead of down. The extra 50 cents could be a marketing tool to make the product more attractive to consumers. We could put a special tag on each piece of clothing, saying: "From the happy workers of Bangladesh, with pleasure. Workers' wellbeing guaranteed." It could be endorsed by Grameen, the NGO Brac, or some other respected international organisation. There could be a beautiful logo to go with it.
When consumers saw that a well-known and trusted institution had taken responsibility to ensure both the present and the future of the workers who produced the garment, they wouldn't mind paying 50 cents extra.Consumers would be proud to support the product and the company, rather than feeling guilty about wearing a product made under harsh working conditions.
I do not expect all companies will immediately implement my proposal. I hope a few come forward to experiment, and that their country's governments, organisations that work to protect labour rights, citizens groups, church groups and the media will step forward to support it, too. This issue should attract attention more urgently now in light of the deaths in Savar.
Pulling industry out of Bangladesh is not a solution. It would be unfortunate for Bangladesh and for the foreign buyers. There is no sense in them leaving a country that has benefited a great deal from their business, a country that could have continuing rapid and visible economic and social progress because of them, a country that would always remain grateful to them.
I believe they would rather remain in Bangladesh, and take pride in creating a new society and economy. Changes are taking place in the world of business. Even if they are tiny changes, they are coming nonetheless. We can accelerate that change.
The Savar tragedy has created a huge wound and deep pain in the minds of the people of this country. I pray that from this deep pain we will find a way to resolve the problems in our national life. When we watched the tragedy unfold on our television screens – the hundreds of helpless people dead and injured – it made us aware of what our dysfunctional system has led us to. After all this, will we just keep on watching as it keeps on happening, again and again?
When will we come to our senses?
Bangladesh's crisis-stricken garment industry suffered its second serious accident in a fortnight when eight people were killed in a fire at a factory in Dhaka that was producing clothes for western retailers, including Primark.
Among the dead were the factory's managing director and principal owner and a senior police officer. Police said the fire started on the ground floor of the Tung Hai Sweater factory in the Mirpur suburb of Dhaka at around midnight on Wednesday.
The incident follows the collapse of the Rana Plaza complex near Dhaka on 24 April. The death toll from that disaster rose to more than 950 yesterday. The illegally constructed, eight-storey building collapsed while thousands of people were working inside. An engineer had declared it unsafe a day before.
The news that the Tung Hai factory supplied western firms will again focus attention on their role in the booming garments industry in Bangladesh. A website for Tung Hai boasted of supplying retailers in Germany, Ireland, Spain, Canada and the UK with products including cardigans, jumpers and pyjamas.
The factory's manager, Jabedur Rahman, said the owner and the other victims – including a member of the youth wing of the ruling Awami League political party and bodyguards – were having a meeting on the ninth floor when the fire broke out. Workers had left after their shift finished at around 8pm.
"The owner and his friends were found on the stairs but pronounced dead after they were taken to hospital," said Rahman. "They may have died of smoke inhalation while trying to find their way down."
On Thursday The facade of the 11-storey Tung Hai building, which towers over the blue-collar neighbourhood of Mirpur, was blackened by smoke. Workers crowded around the entrance, kept at a distance by police officers.
Piles of yarn as well as finished garments lay strewn on the ground floor. Among them were items appearing to be for well-known western labels. These included Cedarwood State and Atmosphere, both owned by Primark.
The head of compliance at Primark's Dhaka office, Arafat Kabir, confirmed that Tung Hai was a long-term supplier. "This was an active factory," he said. "It wasn't a ramshackle building. It was structurally sound and had adequate firefighting equipment. We offer condolences to the families of the deceased." He said that Primark executives had done a series of compliance audits at the factory and the last audit had been around six months ago.
This week the Bangladesh government said it had closed 16 garment factories in Dhaka and two in the south-eastern port city of Chittagong for safety reasons after the collapse of Rana Plaza.
"These factories will only be allowed to reopen after they have made structural and safety improvements," a senior official of the labour ministry said. "Every factory in the country will be inspected as part of a government initiative to ensure safety."
There are concerns that corruption and political influence may allow owners to evade regulations.
Bangladesh is the second biggest garment maker in the world, with 4 million workers, mostly women, employed in the industry. Many of them face chronically unsafe working conditions – with blocked or non-existent fire exits and shaky foundations – and receive barely subsistence wages.
More than 700 workers have died in fires in garment factories since 2005, according to labour groups who complain that neither retailers nor factory owners give enough importance to safety.
Kalpona Akter, executive director of the Bangladesh Centre for Worker Solidarity, said western brands must do more to improve safety in Bangladesh. "Fires are happening in modern factories as well as old ones," she said. "We must build a culture of safety in Bangladesh and international retailers must be part of this."
Mannan Kochi, vice-president of the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association, said the fire in Dhaka was another blow to the image of the country's garment industry.
"This is a terrible accident and the owner himself lost his life," he said. "This was a modern factory. We will co-operate fully with the government to make sure we get to the bottom of what happened."
At the Rana Plaza site, army bulldozers uncovered 100 bodies on Thursday. Families continued to crowd around the site, clutching photos of those still missing. Army officials co-ordinating the rescue said the decomposition of the bodies meant relatives would have to wait for DNA tests, which they said could take up to six months.
Roughly 2,500 people were rescued from the building, including many injured, but there is no official estimate of the numbers still missing.
The government has blamed the collapse on the owners and builders for using shoddy building materials, including substandard rods, bricks and cement, and not obtaining the necessary official clearances.
Primark and its Canadian counterpart Loblaw have announced they will compensate the victims of the disaster, the world's worst industrial accident since the Bhopal gas leak in India in 1984.
Eight people are confirmed dead after a clothes factory caught fire overnight in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Officials say they do not yet know the cause of the fire in the 11-storey building. The blaze comes two weeks after the collapse of Rana Plaza, another clothing building, where more than 900 people died
A week on, the Rana Plaza catastrophe in Bangladesh is now the deadliest catastrophe in the history of the garment industry, with the death toll exceeding 500. The gruesome accounts of rescuers cutting off limbs from trapped workers (sometimes without anaesthesia) surely leaves a stain on brands that no new collection, celebrity endorsement or micro-trend can wash away? Doesn't it?
However, it was simultaneously shocking and grimly predictable. Those who have petitioned the fashion industry to face up to its responsibilities will have felt as sick as I did when they heard a factory complex had collapsed in Dhaka. Yes, there were other types of businesses in Rana Plaza but we knew immediately that the bodies pulled dead from the rubble would be garment workers producing clothing for the retailers and brands we all patronise.
Because garment workers are always there, bulking up the casualty lists of the biggest industrial accidents, and setting new mortality records. At this particular complex when dangerous cracks were reported, other workers were apparently sent away. Garment workers were ordered back in.
When you're part of the Cut Make and Trim (CMT) army, as we might call the estimated 40 million producing fast fashion around the world, 3.5 million in Bangladesh alone, there's simply no let up. A makeshift factory might collapse at night as happened in 2005 in the Spectrum knitwear factory, also in the Savar district of Dhaka, leaving 62 dead. Or it might catch fire during daylight hours as in Tazreen last November when fire escapes were locked and more than 100 died. Either way, garment workers will be trying to complete near-impossible orders.
Perhaps, though, the Rana Plaza tragedy could be a tipping point. Maybe young consumers (often considered difficult to reach) will be jolted into action against the brands they seem to worship. "I would urge any young shopper to think about whether they believe over 500 deaths is an acceptable scenario," says Stacey Dooley, who saw at first hand the real cost of fast fashion production, for the BBC 3 series Blood, Sweat and T-Shirts. "If not, they should let the retailers know and threaten to take their money elsewhere," she adds.
It's indicative of the chaos of today's fashion supply chain that many brands don't know where they are producing. An order might be placed in a first-tier factory that ticks all the auditor's health and safety boxes. But, according to Doug Miller, emeritus professor of supply chain ethics at Northumbria University and author of Last Nightshift in Savar: "Factory owners can't make money on the original order – the price has been set too low – so will therefore find someone who can," subcontracting to producers of ever-declining standards.
"In Bangladesh," Miller says, "you have a glut of buyers in search of a cheap product wanting to place enormous orders; and capacity is built hurriedly. Factory installations are shoddy, workers locked in and lead times are too tight."
It remains to be seen whether consumers will tolerate the usual excuses from brands. Perhaps the most pernicious of all – I paraphrase – is: "We don't own the factories so we can't help what happens in them." This is usually followed by devolving responsibility to the host government. It is technically true: but let's not pretend this is a regret. Over two decades the big retailers and brands (not just those caught producing in Rana Plaza) have systematically distanced themselves from the manufacture of their product. It is part of their business model.
Meanwhile fashion brands seem allergic to collective action. Instead of coming together as one body with NGOs to trash out living wages and safety agreements, they go it alone. They excel at dreaming up new schemes that look great in a corporate social responsibility video but are useless at creating any effective change. "The answers to this latest crisis have got to be collective in every sense of the world," Miller says.
The fashion industry has some pretty specious get-out-of-jail-free cards. Some are cultural. Livia Firth, founder of the Green Carpet Challenge and a campaigner for industry reform, says: "The industry is plagued by disposability and sensationalism. Fashion editorial, in my opinion, should be there to teach us about the beauty of craftsmanship, ateliers, seamstresses, to celebrate fashion heroes." Without this, she argues: "We don't give a damn about the people who make the garments. They're incidental."
More prosaically, antitrust laws (also known as competition laws) are cited by fast fashion brands as a reason for refusing to discuss pricing strategies, costs in the supply chain or the factories they source from. This impedes strategies to make the supply chain more equitable. Further hope for change, however, was provided last week by word from within the all-party parliamentary group (APPG) on ethics and sustainability in fashion.
"Let's now be really serious about the true cost of clothing," Baroness Young, its chair, told me. "The APPG is determined to call to account all of those companies that are implicated in these kinds of practices. And we want them to understand that we will examine how supply chains function and expect them to remedy problems."
Young should expect to call a lot of witnesses. Many believe that the whole fashion supply chain is caught up in the problem. "Do not for a minute suppose that just because a brand you wear wasn't found in the rubble, it is clean. It could have been any of the brands," says Sam Maher of the campaign group Labour Behind the Label.
Just two companies – PVH, owner of Tommy Hilfiger and Calvin Klein among others, and Tchibo, a German retail brand – have signed the Bangladesh fire and building safety agreement drafted late last year. Gap led the negotiations initially but pulled out in favour of its own self-auditing agreement. The deadline for brands to sign the agreement is 15 May. They must consider it a cultural licence to operate. This week the ethical brand People Tree will urge consumers to join its Rag Rage campaign demanding retailers sign up to a three-point plan including signing the Bangladesh fire and safety agreement.
The window to demand change is closing. Wednesday marked the mass burial of unidentified garment workers in a large pit in Savar. Thursday marked the reopening of garment factories across Bangladesh. By Friday the Bangladesh finance minister, Abul Maal Abdul Muhith, was playing down the significance of the tragedy. If we don't act now, it'll be business as usual followed by shopping as usual. We cannot let that happen.
Lucy Siegle, the Observer's ethical living columnist, is the author of To Die For: Is Fashion Wearing Out the World?
Clothes workers in Bangladesh say the recent building collapse in Dhaka has made them concerned for their own safety. The accident has also highlighted the low wages many in Bangladesh's clothes industry receive, which one worker says can amount to £33 per month. The death toll from the collapse of the Rana Plaza, which housed factories and clothes merchants, has passed 500 and is still rising
Bangladesh's finance minister said on Friday he did not think the impact of last week's factory collapse on his country's garment industry would be serious, hours after the 500th body was retrieved.
Abul Maal Abdul Muhith spoke as the government dealt with those whom it blamed for the disaster in the Dhaka suburb of Savar. It suspended Savar's mayor and arrested an engineer who had called for the building's evacuation last week, but who has also been accused of helping the owner add three illegal floors to make the structure eight storeys high. The building's owner had been arrested earlier.
The government appears to be trying to fend off accusations that it is partly to blame for the tragedy because of weak oversight of the building's construction.
On a visit to the Indian capital, New Delhi, Muhith said the collapse would not harm Bangladesh's garment industry, which is by far the country's biggest source of export income.
"The present difficulties … well, I don't think it is really serious – it's an accident," he said. "And the steps we have taken in order to make sure that it doesn't happen, they are quite elaborate and I believe will be appreciated by all."
Muhith said he was not worried about foreign retailers pulling orders from Bangladesh: "These are individual cases of … accidents. It happens everywhere."
The 24 April collapse may be the deadliest garment factory accident ever. It has surpassed the Triangle Shirtwaist factory fire in New York in 1911, which killed 146 workers, and more recent tragedies including two fires in 2012 – one in Pakistan that killed 260 and one in Bangladesh that killed 112.
The official Dhaka death toll reached 501 on Friday and was expected to climb further. Workers were carefully using cranes to remove concrete rubble and continuing the slow task of recovering bodies. The official number still missing has been 149 since Wednesday, though unofficial estimates are higher.
"We are still proceeding cautiously so that we get the bodies intact," said Major General Chowdhury Hassan Suhwardy, the local army commander who is supervising the rescue.
A government investigator said substandard building materials, combined with the vibration of heavy machines used by the five garment factories in the Rana Plaza building, led to the collapse.
Mainuddin Khandkar, head of a government investigation committee, said substandard rods, cement, bricks and other weak materials were used in the construction of the building, which was not properly fortified to house the factories' equipment.
About 15 minutes before the collapse, the building was hit by a power blackout, so its heavy generators were turned on, shaking the weakened structure, Khandkar said.
"The vibration created by machines and generators operating in the five garment factories contributed first to the cracks and then the collapse," he said, adding that a final report would be soon submitted to the government.
An engineer, Abdur Razzak Khan, was arrested on Thursday on a charge of negligence, police said. Khan is said to have worked as a consultant to Rana Plaza's owner, Mohammed Sohel Rana, when three floors were added.
Rana called Khan to inspect the building after it developed cracks on 23 April, local media reported. That night Khan appeared on a private TV station saying that after his inspection he told Rana to evacuate the building because it was not safe.
Khan, a former engineer at Jahangirnagar University near Savar, said he had told government engineers the building needed to be examined.
Police ordered the building to be evacuated, but witnesses say Rana told people gathered outside the next morning the building was safe and that garment factory managers told their workers to go inside. It collapsed hours later.
Authorities also suspended the mayor of Savar, Mohammad Refatullah, for alleged negligence, a local government spokesman, Abu Alam, said.
He added that an official investigation found that the mayor ignored regulations when he approved the design and layout of the building. The mayor is from the opposition Bangladesh Nationalist party, which has criticised his suspension as politically motivated.
The government also effectively suspended Kabir Hossain Sardar, the top government administrator in Savar, following reports that he declared the building safe after inspecting it a day before the collapse. Sardar had close links with Rana. Alam said the government was taking action against everyone involved with Rana and his building.
Rana was also arrested and is expected to be charged with negligence, illegal construction and forcing workers to join work, crimes punishable by a maximum of seven years in jail. Authorities have not said if more serious crimes will be added.
The Bangladesh high court has ordered the government to confiscate Rana's property and freeze the assets of the owners of the factories in Rana Plaza so the money can be used to pay the salaries of their workers.
Among the garment-makers in the building were Phantom Apparels, Phantom Tac, Ether Tex, New Wave Style and New Wave Bottoms.
The tragedy of the Rana Plaza factory collapse in Bangladesh has prompted a wave of fury across the world.
There is anger that profits were put above the lives of the thousands of people who worked long hours for minimal pay, and anger at international buyers that give little thought to health and safety.
Employees were forced to continue working in the building near the capital, Dhaka, despite it having been condemned as unsafe just the day before it collapsed. By Friday, the death toll had exceeded 500.
But John Hilary, executive director of the campaigning group War on Want, said the terrible scenes at Rana Plaza had become a "defining moment" in raising people's consciousness.
"The link between poverty and cheap clothes made in Bangladesh has been well established," says Hilary. "What is important about this tragedy is that is has thrown into stark relief the fact that this is an industry where the workers are not just exploited and forced to work in an environment of harassment, violence and abuse, but where basic guarantees of safety have been thrown to the wind, where corners have been cut to the extent that a building can collapse on top of thousands of workers."
Fatema Khatun Moni, 21, survived the collapse. She came to Dhaka to try to improve her family's life in the northern district of Naogaon. As a sewing operator at New Wave Bottoms, Moni earns a basic wage of £38 per month, rising to £78 with overtime. She says four people in her family rely on her income for their survival.
Moni was not planning to go to work on 24 April, but she was told by factory bosses that her pay would be docked if she failed to turn up. She survived the collapse by jumping out of a second-floor window as the building crumbled around her. Now, with her injuries, she is unsure how or when she will be able to return to work.
Moni is one of 4 million people who plough £13bn in export revenue into Bangladesh's economy.
While the garment sector has been credited as the main driver of Bangladesh's economic growth – the country has experienced a 5-6% increase year on year since 2005 – it has done little to improve the lives of those manning the machines.
"The garment sector is a massive industry generating huge profits, yet the people at the bottom are not yet seeing the benefit," says Jenny Ricks, head of campaigns at ActionAid UK. "There is huge potential there to change things fundamentally for workers, particularly women, for whom these jobs could be empowering."
Hilary says Bangladesh's garment sector has trapped millions of the most easily exploited people in badly paid and dangerous work.
"When you've got an industry where the government's official strategy is that the country will undercut any other nation in terms of labour costs, and companies that are able to pull their contracts at any time by demanding that prices are slashed year on year, then the possibility of emancipation turns into just a dead-end exploitation experience."
Babul Akhter, president of the Bangladesh Garment and Industrial Workers Federation, said buyers have a responsibility to check the safety and security of those making the clothes they order, but most overlook this.
Abdus Salam Murshedy, former president of Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association, adds: "The buyers and brands look for the most competitive offer. We cannot pay appropriate wages [to workers] unless we get proper prices for the orders."
One buyer, Primark, has agreed to pay compensation to the families of those who died.
The 2006 Bangladesh Labour Act states that a company must devote 5% of its net profit for the welfare of workers every year.
Economist MM Akash, a professor at the University of Dhaka, says the loss to the workers of this law going unenforced is huge. "I have calculated that every year if 5% of the profit is devoted to the welfare of workers, the total amount comes to about 30 million taka [£247,020]," he says.
It is hoped the sheer scale of the devastation and the loss of life at Rana Plaza will force changes. International pressure on both the retailers and the Bangladesh government appears to be mounting – the EU is considering action against Bangladesh, which has preferential access to its markets for its garments, to pressure the country to improve safety standards.
"There is the potential for something to come out of the devastation of Rana Plaza," says Hilary. "Yet it all rests on recognising that the power to change this comes at the top of the value chain, from those people who can dictate the terms on which the clothes are made.
"Retailers and governments are finding they can't shirk their responsibilities on this. The challenge is how to keep holding their feet to the fire and ensure that the lessons of Rana Plaza are not forgotten."
Shameful, monumentally shameful! As a worker in the garment centre for over 35 years in New York, I'm furious at the needless brutality to the workers at the Bangladesh textile factory, which killed more than 400 and injured 2,500 (Letters, 29 April). As building owners, manufacturers, stores – including some in America – point fingers and blame each other, everyone needs to look straight at themselves, deep into their own hearts.
They will see that this tragedy, like too many others before it, has to do with two words: "cheap labour" – putting their thirst for profits over the living, breathing people who do the work, paying the lowest wages possible and skimping on workplace safety. With working men and women – and even children – so systematically exploited worldwide, there is nothing more important than for us to ask and answer this essential question, first asked by educator and founder of aesthetic realism, Eli Siegel: "What does a person deserve by being a person?"
Bruce Blaustein
New York, USA
A photographic highlight selected by the picture desk. Sajid Hossain's distressing image of a worker buried beneath the rubble of the collapsed Rana Plaza building
A photographic highlight selected by the picture desk. Sajid Hossain's distressing image of a worker buried beneath the rubble of the collapsed Rana Plaza building, many garments made at the factory were destined for shops in Europe and North America
Helen Hai, vice-president of Chinese footwear manufacturer the Huajian Group, has a bold ambition. Within a decade, she wants Ethiopia to be a global hub for the shoe industry, supplying the African, European and American markets.
"We are not coming all the way here just to reduce our costs by 10 to 20%," Hai says. "Our aim is in 10 years' time to have a new cluster of shoe making here. We want to build a whole supply chain … I want everything to be produced here."
Huajian has a factory near Addis Ababa employing 600 people, which opened in January 2012, and has committed to jointly invest $2bn (£1.3bn) over the next decade to create a light manufacturing special economic zone in Ethiopia, creating employment for around 100,000 Ethiopians. The company, which employs 25,000 workers in China, expects to be able to provide around 30,000 jobs in Addis Ababa by 2022.
Huajian's partner in this project is the China-Africa Development Fund (CADFund), a private equity facility promoting Chinese investment in the continent. Born out of the 2006 Forum on China-Africa Co-operation, the fund was launched in June 2007 with $1bn provided by the China Development Bank. A further injection of $2bn was made early last year.
CADFund focuses on funding agriculture, infrastructure, natural resources and industrial park projects like that planned by Huajian, and has invested in a diverse range of ventures including a power plant in Ghana, a port in Nigeria, cotton farms in Malawi and a $100m car plant in South Africa.
Hai's vision is on its way to becoming a reality: a lease has been signed on 300 hectares (741 acres) of land in Lebu, on the outskirts of Addis Ababa, where Huajian plans to build a "shoe city", providing accommodation for up to 200,000 workers and factory space for other producers of footwear, handbags and accessories. The complex will offer help and advice to entrepreneurs setting up companies. "[It will be] a one-stop shop for manufacturers that are similar to us," Hai, who expects construction on the site to begin this year, says.
"One thing in my strategy is very clear: that I don't want to compete with locals," Hai says. "I want to help them grow because when local producers grow, the whole market is growing. If it is just myself growing here in five years' time, I will leave."
One area where she feels the company could make a difference is in leather tanning. "The sheepskin and goatskin are good but local people don't know how to manage cowskin," Hai says. "I want to offer my skills to help the locals. I don't want to have my own tannery because I don't want to create problems. I want to be friendly."
This kind of warm and fuzzy talk from a Chinese company may surprise some analysts, academics and journalists who often characterise China's involvement in Africa as voracious neocolonial pillaging. Hai admits that her strategy is not necessarily pursued by every Chinese private enterprise operating in the continent.
Zemedeneh Negatu, managing partner at Ernst & Young Ethiopia, welcomes Huajian's plan to build a complete supply chain for the shoe industry and applauds its efforts to transfer skills. "That should be the goal. You create clusters around one or two major foreign or Ethiopian investors, throughout the country, based on competitive and comparative advantages," he says. "Huajian could be the anchor but all around are Ethiopian companies. It should be made clear to investors that they need to help build local capacity."
The company cites employee welfare as a priority. In China, Huajian has a modest outfit 40km (25 miles) south of the capital, Beijing, employing 1,700 workers and exporting more than $1m worth of shoes each month to the US and the UK. In Dongguan, in the southern province of Guangdong, the majority of the staff come from poor rural areas. The company provides accommodation, hot meals, clothing and laundry services, as well as free childcare. A similar package is offered to its Ethiopian workers who, in addition, earn 10% above the average local wage.
The Huajian factory near Addis Ababa employs 130 Chinese workers, all in supervisory roles. The number of expatriates on the payroll has come down from 200 when production began in January 2012, and Huajian plans to reduce it further. "For me, localisation is so important. I don't see myself managing this factory in five to eight years' time. I see someone local standing here talking to you," Hai says.
The company has selected 130 university graduates from southern Ethiopia to spend a year in China at its training facility. About 270 more will be recruited later. "They are going to be the future managers," Hai says. "They are going to be a new force."
The UK high street retailer Primark and Canadian counterpart Loblaws have announced they will compensate the victims of last week's collapse of a Bangladeshi factory complex where suppliers of some of their clothing lines were located.
The illegally constructed, eight-storey Rana Plaza collapsed in a heap while thousands of people were working inside in five garment factories that supply leading western brands including Primark, Matalan, Mango and Benetton.
About 2,500 survivors have been accounted for so far. Rescuers were using heavy machinery on Monday to cut through the debris after giving up hope of finding any more survivors.
The British-owned Primark, which said that the payment would include long-term aid for children who had lost parents and financial aid to those who were injured, also urged other clothing retailers who had suppliers based in the factory near Dhaka to come forward and offer assistance.
But the company stopped short of meeting the demands of campaigning organisations and trade unions to sign up to a building safety action plan aimed at preventing a repeat of the disaster, in which at least 382 people were killed.
Announcing the compensation package on Monday, Primark said it had joined with a local non-governmental organisation (NGO) to address the immediate needs of victims, including the provision of emergency food aid to families.
It added: "This will include the provision of long-term aid for children who have lost parents, financial aid for those injured and payments to the families of the deceased.
"Primark notes the fact that its supplier shared the building with those of other retailers," said the retailer, whose supplier, Simple Approach, had occupied the second floor of the eight-storey Rana Plaza building that collapsed.
"We are fully aware of our responsibility. We urge these other retailers to come forward and offer assistance."
Canadian counterpart Loblaw Companies Ltd, which had some of its Joe Fresh clothing line manufactured at Rana Plaza, said it too was offering compensation. "We are working to ensure that we will deliver support in the best and most meaningful way possible, and with the goal of ensuring that victims and their families receive benefits now and in the future," spokeswoman Julija Hunter told the Associated Press.
A petition drawn up by the National Garment Workers' Federation, which called on Primark, Matalan and Mango to pay compensation to victims' families and to sign up to the Bangladesh fire and building safety agreement to prevent future deaths of garment workers, has so far received nearly 600,000 signatures.
Responding to calls for it to sign up to the agreement, a spokesman for Primark said that the issue of structural integrity was complex and that buildings had multiple ownership, tenants, floors and many international customers.
He added that Primark would work with fellow members of the Ethical Trading Initiative (ETI), a UK-based grouping of retailers, unions and NGOs, "to agree and monitor an effective methodology to assess structural integrity, which can then be universally adopted".
"An equivalent action plan on fire safety has already been endorsed by the ETI and its members, demonstrating the effectiveness of this approach," he said.
Earlier on Monday, the Italian retail multinational Benetton admitted that it had been supplied for a one-off order by one of the factories in the building. It had previously denied any links with the businesses there.
The company's U-turn came as a Bangladesh court gave police 15 days to question the owner of the building. Mohammed Sohel Rana, who was arrested on Sunday as he tried to flee to India, will be held for questioning on charges of negligence, illegal construction and forcing employees to work in the building. His father, Abdul Khaleque, was also arrested on suspicion of aiding Rana to force people to work in a dangerous building.
Benetton's announcement follows the publication by the Associated Press of pictures of clothes bearing its labels in the debris. On the day of the tragedy, the Italian firm issued a statement saying: "None of the companies involved are suppliers to Benetton Group or any of its brands."
The new statement said: "Regarding the tragic accident in Dhaka, Bangladesh, we wish to confirm that none of the companies involved is a supplier to any of our brands. Further to this, a one-time order was completed and shipped out of one of the manufacturers involved several weeks prior to the accident.
"Since then, this subcontractor has been removed from our supplier list. A programme of random audits take place on an ongoing basis throughout our global supply chain to ensure that all direct and indirect suppliers comply with our long-standing social, labour and environmental standards."
New Wave Bottoms, one of the manufacturers based at Rana Plaza, lists Benetton as a client, while labour rights activists digging through the debris also said they found documents linking Benetton to the factory.
Bonmarché, a retailer with more than 200 stores across the UK, has acknowledged that its products were made in the block, while the UK chain Matalan also said it had been supplied from the factory in the past. The Spanish chain Mango said it had planned to obtain samples from a supplier in the complex.
Italian company says garment manufacturer completed a one-off order but has now been taken off its list of suppliers
Khadija is cradling her 12-hour-old baby in her arms. All she wants, she tells photographer Gazi Nafis Ahmed, is for her daughter to have a better life than she has had: which means enough food, shelter, education and healthcare.
The garment factory worker is just one of countless men and women whose lives Ahmed has documented in the past four years for his poignant series of pictures, entitled Made in Bangladesh.
Although the fashion they create fills our high-street shops, Bangladeshi workers are among the lowest-paid in the industry anywhere in the world, and they often have to toil in terrifying conditions.
This week the country is reeling from the collapse of the Rana plaza – an eight-storey building in which garment workers were apparently forced to work despite warnings it was unsafe, had large cracks in its walls and the police had ordered that it should be evacuated. So far at least 377 people are thought to have died.
But the latest tragedy is just one in a long line of disasters that have claimed the lives of Bangladeshi clothing workers. In November last year 112 workers burned alive in a factory with no fire exits. In 2010 27 people died and more than 100 were injured in a fire in a factory that made clothes for high-street retailer Gap.
Yet Ahmed's work highlights the less eye-catching dangers, too. One picture shows the aftermath of a boiler explosion that injured six people, and another the grinding poverty that keeps six members of one family living in a bamboo hut. One woman, pictured staring bleakly at the camera, explains how she was forced to hide in the toilet for two days by her employers in case buyers who had come to inspect the factory she works in discovered she was pregnant. Later she was sacked instead of being given maternity pay.
The Italian retail giant Benetton has admitted that it was supplied by one of the garment factories in the Bangladesh building which collapsed last Wednesday for a one-off order, after previously denying that it had links with any of the businesses there.
The company's U-turn came as a Bangladesh court on Monday gave police 15 days to question the owner of the building, in which at least 382 people were killed, as rescuers used heavy machinery to cut through the destroyed structure after giving up hopes of finding any more survivors.
Mohammed Sohel Rana, who was arrested on Sunday as he tried to flee to India, will be held for questioning on charges of negligence, illegal construction and forcing employees to work in the building. His father, Abdul Khaleque, was also arrested on suspicion of aiding Rana to force people to work in a dangerous building.
The illegally constructed, eight-storey Rana Plaza collapsed in a heap as thousands of people worked inside, in five garment factories that supply major western brands including Primark, Matalon, Mango and Benetton. About 2,500 survivors have been accounted for.
Benetton's announcement follows the publication by the Associated Press of pictures garments with its labels in the debris. The Italian firm, which on the day of the tragedy issued a statement saying "None of the companies involved are suppliers to Benetton Group or any of its brands", said this had been updated in the light of contiuning investigations.
The statement said: "Regarding the tragic accident in Dhaka, Bangladesh, we wish to confirm that none of the companies involved is a supplier to any of our brands. Further to this, a one-time order was completed and shipped out of one of the manufacturers involved several weeks prior to the accident.
"Since then, this subcontractor has been removed from our supplier list. A programme of random audits take place on an ongoing basis throughout our global supply chain, to ensure that all direct and indirect suppliers comply with our long-standing social, labor and environmental standards."
New Wave Bottoms, one of the manufacturers based at Rana Plaza, lists Benetton as a client while labour rights activists digging through the debris also said they found documents linking Benetton to the factory.
Britain's Primark and Bon Marche and Spain's Mango have acknowledged their products were made in the block, while UK chain Matalan said it had been supplied in the past.
A petition drawn up by the National Garment Workers' Federation calling on Primark, Matalan and Mango to pay compensation to victims' families and to sign the Bangladesh fire and building safety agreement to prevent the future deaths of garment workers, has so far received nearly 600,000 signatures.
A garment manufacturers' group said the factories in the building employed 3,122 workers, but it was not clear how many were inside when it fell.
The collapse and previous disasters in garment factories have focused attention on the poor working conditions of workers who toil for as little as £25 a month to produce clothing for top international brands.
Mohammed Sohel Rana is arrested on Sunday in connection with the collapse of his manufacturing building in Dhaka
Most of the workers in the collapsed Dhaka building containing four garment factories were women, many of whom had expressed concern about cracks in the building the day before, but had been ordered back to work because it "had been inspected and was safe" (Report, 25 April). Now many of those women are dead. But never mind, because we in the west can continue to rejoice in dirt-cheap garments. "Can't decide between the geometric or floral bikini? It doesn't matter, because at £3 a pop, it's easier to buy both," says a piece accompanying your report on Primark's "absolutely brilliant start to the year" (Primark's high street strategy lifts sales 24%, 24 April). Its items are "often worn just once". It's time for us shoppers to wake up and do some joined-up thinking.
Susan Tomes
London
• The factory collapse in Bangladesh will have pricked the conscience of many a business that relies on cheap labour in developing countries to keep down the costs of production. We hope the tragedy brings about a sharper focus on occupational health and safety, in which organisations recognise their moral duty to protect workers from harm no matter where they are in the supply chain.
Jane White
Institution of Occupational Safety & Health
• As a first step, we suggest that Britain's importers and retailers of clothes made in Bangladesh should set up a fund to help the victims of the factory collapse and their families, to which those of us who benefit from cheap clothes, ie most of us, can contribute.
David and Mary Moore
Somerton, Somerset
When the building he owned collapsed, entombing hundreds of garment workers beneath its choking rubble, Mohammed Sohel Rana vanished. He abandoned his home in Savar, 12 miles north of the Bangladeshi capital, Dhaka, and drove off. While rescuers frantically dug out the living and the dead, Rana was nowhere to be seen.
On Sunday, however, Bangladeshi police caught up with the fugitive politician, arresting him in the border town of Benapole, 250 miles away. He had been trying to escape into neighbouring India. Instead, a group of commandos flew Rana back to Dhaka by helicopter.
"Acting on a tipoff, we apprehended Sohel Rana, the man who is responsible for the [Dhaka suburb of] Savar tragedy," Colonel Mokhlesur Rahman said. Flanked by two policemen, Rana was wearing an ash-blue shirt with white spots. He looked dishevelled and fidgety.
Many say the owner should now be executed for his role in the tragedy, in which nearly 400 people are so far known to have died. "He should be hanged for causing the deaths of so many people," Masuma Akter, whose brother is still missing, told the Guardian.
Rana's arrest sparked celebrations at the site of the eight-storey complex, Rana Plaza, where relatives are still desperately waiting for news of missing loved ones. On Sunday evening, police charged Rana with criminal negligence and illegal construction.
Smoke, meanwhile, billowed from the wrecked site, sending rescue teams scurrying for safety. A fire service official at the scene said a fire started after army engineers tried to cut through a column to gain access to an air pocket where four people were believed to be trapped.
The fire illustrated the difficulties rescuers face in getting people out of the tangled mass of steel and concrete. Shams Uddin, a firefighter, said his team had been trying since morning to rescue a woman named Shahana, but their efforts failed when the fire broke out.
"We were talking to her, giving her oxygen, while we cut through the concrete," he said. "But after hanging on for four days, she died in the fire. Three of my men were also injured and are now in hospital."
Rana's dramatic capture raises a broader question: whether Wednesday's disaster was all the fault of one man, or, as some suggest, was the product of Bangladesh's dysfunctional system, where politics and business are closely connected, corruption is rife, and the gap between rich and poor continues to grow.
Rana, the son of a poor door-to-door salesman, entered local politics and became a member of the ruling Awami League's youth front. He has also worked for its bitter rival, the Bangladesh National party (BNP).
"Whatever party is in power, he is there," Ashrafuddin Khan Imu, another Awami League leader, told news agencies. Most recently, Imu said, Rana had been working for a local member of parliament, Talukder Touhid Jang Murad.
Rana's influential political contacts allowed him to circumvent the rules and to get rich. He reportedly bought several government-owned properties at a discount and in 2010 constructed Rana Plaza on the site of a pond. The building was supposed to be five storeys high; Rana added an extra three. Two local engineers and the mayor – a political ally – signed off on the project.
On Wednesday, Rana confidently insisted the building was safe, despite the discovery of ominous cracks. He told 3,200 workers employed by five garment companies that they had nothing to worry about and should return to their jobs. "The building has minor damage. There is nothing serious," he insisted. "It will stand for a hundred years." At 8am, the shift began. Forty-five minutes later, the building collapsed.
Bangladesh's garment industry accounts for 80% of the country's total exports, and last year generated $20bn (£13bn). But it is also frequently caught up in the country's venomous political struggles and strikes are frequent. These, in turn, place pressure on managers to deliver orders for western companies. The owners of garment factories are reluctant to send their workforces home.
There was some good news earlier in the day, as five survivors were pulled alive from the rubble more than 100 hours after the collapse, bringing to more than 2,400 the number of people rescued. But rescuers say hope is fading for the hundreds who are still missing after the accident.
The death toll continued to rise on Sunday evening, as army and fire service teams prepared to move in with heavy equipment to clear large chunks of fallen masonry.
Families of those missing have been pleading with the authorities not to use heavy machinery, fearing that survivors could be crushed underneath.
On Saturday, police also arrested the owner of Phantom Apparels Ltd, a clothing company that was housed on the fifth floor of the Rana Plaza. The company lists the Spanish fashion label Mango and other international retailers among its clients.
The arrest brings to three the number of clothing company owners arrested over the deaths. A spokesman for the garment manufacturers' association said all three had given themselves up to police voluntarily.
Bangladesh's prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, keen to distance her party from the disaster, had demanded Rana's arrest. Her home minister had initially suggested that the building might have come down after opposition supporters shook the walls. The statement was swiftly withdrawn.
The outlook for Rana now does not look favourable. His political allies have abandoned him, Bangladesh's most powerful garment industry association says he ignored its warnings to shut the building, and the prime minister herself called for his arrest.
A new campaign has been launched to raise money for the Bangladesh factory collapse victims by urging shoppers to pay a voluntary "T-shirt tax". The cash is going to the charity ActionAid which will distribute it to the families of victims killed in the disaster, as well as to workers who survived.
Victoria Butler-Cole, a 36-year-old barrister from Kent who came up with the idea, said: "It seems to me we have a moral duty to help. Everyone has something in their wardrobe from Bangladesh. This isn't just the fault of companies who supply cheap clothes."
Butler-Cole said shoppers should consider donating the difference between what they paid for a T-shirt – and what it would cost if it had been produced by workers treated property. For example, if a T-shirt produced in Bangladesh cost £3, a £3 donation would be fair, she said.
On Saturday demonstrators gathered outside cut-price retailer Primark's flagship store in Oxford Street. A petition has been launched calling for Primark and other brands, including Matalan and Mango, which used businesses based inside the Dhaka building, to compensate the families of workers killed or injured.
Butler-Cole acknowledged struggling families wouldn't be able to pay a T-shirt tax, and often relied on cut-price clothes. But she said others should consider it. The tax was better than a high-street boycott, which could lead to Bangladeshi workers losing their livelihoods, she added.
Butler-Cole's sister Imogen, who lived in Bangladesh, has launched a Facebook page and Twitter campaign with the hashtag #TShirtTax.
Currently ActionAid Bangladesh has 200 volunteers helping with the rescue operation and providing food, water and emergency equipment.
Mohammed Sohel Rana is arrested on Sunday in connection with the collapse of his manufacturing building in Dhaka. Rana had been on the run from police, amid claims the building was known to be structurally unsafe. Four days on from the collapse, survivors are still being rescued from the rubble, though the death toll is nearing 380 
 
 Warning: contains distressing images
People near the site of a clothes factory in Dhaka mourn as bodies are brought from the collapsed manufacturing building
Police in Bangladesh have detained two factory owners for criminal negligence over the deaths of at least 352 workers at an eight-storey building that collapsed on Wednesday – a day after warnings had been given that it was unsafe.
Two engineers who had been involved in issuing building permits for the Rana Plaza complex in Savar, just north of Dhaka, were also being held. The owner of the building was being sought by police, who have put border authorities on alert and arrested his wife in an attempt to bring him out of hiding.
On Saturday around 30 survivors were found and police say that as many as 900 people remain missing, trapped dead and alive under the twisted steel and concrete, through which rescue teams were still searching last night using electric drills, shovels, crowbars and their bare hands. Anger at the collapse has sparked days of protests and clashes, with police on Saturday using teargas, water cannon and rubber bullets on demonstrators who burned cars.
In London, demonstrators gathered outside Primark's flagship store in Oxford Street after it emerged that the chain used a floor of the Savar building. A petition has been launched calling for Primark and other brands, including Matalan and Mango, which used the factories, to compensate the families of workers killed or injured.
Murray Worthy, from the campaign group War on Want, said that it was not calling for a boycott that might cost jobs where they are badly needed in the impoverished Asian country: "We're here to send a message to Primark that the deaths in Bangladesh were not an accident – they were entirely preventable deaths. If Primark had taken its responsibility to those workers seriously, no one need have died."
Campaigners want Primark, Matalan and Mango to sign the Bangladesh fire and building safety agreement to end the "appallingly unsafe factory conditions" in the country.
After the owners of the New Wave Apparel and New Wave Bottoms factories, which had been on the sixth and seventh floors of the building, surrendered to police in the early hours of Saturday morning, a spokeswoman for Matalan, which has 212 stores in the UK, said: "We can confirm that New Wave has been a supplier to Matalan, although we don't have any current production with them." The arrests come after growing public anger over revelations that Sohel Rana, the politically connected owner of Rana Plaza, had been allowed to build the complex without permits, and that garment factory owners ordered workers into the building despite large cracks appearing in the walls, and jolts being felt at the structure the previous day.
As tens of thousands of workers continued to protest in the garment factory belts around Dhaka, the government has ordered all factories to remain closed until tomorrow. "These workers were called to their deaths by the owners," said Munir Hossain, a demonstrator in the Badda area of Dhaka. "This is not an accident. It's murder."
At the remains of the building, as wailing relatives pushed against a ring that volunteers had created around the site, engineers have been tunnelling through an adjoining building to reach the lower floors. Army officers co-ordinating the rescue teams, composed of soldiers, firemen and local volunteers, have said they are reluctant to use bulldozers until they are sure that there are no remaining survivors. But on Saturday, desperate cries were still being heard through cracks in the concrete. As dust-covered survivors were pulled out, waiting families cheered, the noise almost drowning out the sirens of the ambulances waiting to take them to hospital. "I was on the fourth floor when the floor suddenly gave way under me," said Nasima Banu, 25, a seamstress at Phantom Apparel, which lists Mango among its clients. "I was buried alive. I thought I would never see my husband and children again."
The disaster dwarfs Bangladesh's last industrial accident, a fire in November at the Tazreen fashions factory that killed more than 100 people. That accident brought promises of reform from the government and manufacturers, but analysts say nothing has changed in five months. Although around 700 workers have died in industrial accidents in Bangladesh since 2005, according to the International Labour Organisation, no factory owner has been found guilty of negligence. "The political clout of the garment industry makes reform difficult," said Babul Akter, the president of the Bangladesh Garment and Industrial Workers' Federation.
The Savar tragedy has increased pressure on a country already facing criticism for poor labour conditions. In December a group of US congressmen wrote to Barack Obama's trade representative, Ron Kirk, calling for a review of facilities enjoyed by Bangladeshi exporters. The US gives developing countries special tariffs to export goods to the US. But Bangladesh could lose preferential treatment. Bangladesh's garment industry was the third largest in the world in 2011, after China and Italy, and with a minimum wage of about $38 (£24) a month it draws international brands looking for a cheaper alternative to China.
Two owners of clothes factories based in the building that collapsed on the outskirts of Dhaka in Bangladesh have been arrested.
Mahbubur Rahman Tapas and Balzul Samad Adnan –the owner and managing director of New Wave Style, the largest of the five factories in the collapsed Rana Plaza building – surrendered overnight to the Bangladesh Garment Manufactures & Exporters Association and were handed to police.
They are accused of repeatedly ignoring warnings about the safety of the factory complex and forcing their employees to continue working.
Two engineers involved in designing the complex in the non-industrial Savar zone on the outskirts of the capital were also arrested at their homes early on Saturday for ignoring the same warnings after cracks were spotted in the building on Tuesday.
The arrests on Saturday came as the death toll rose to 352. Rescue workers pulled another 29 people to safety on Saturday after locating another 40 deep under rubble. More than 3,000 workers may have been inside the building when it collapsed and police believe as many as 900 are still missing.
Sohel Rana, the owner of the eight-storey building – which officials said had been built illegally – is still on the run. Police said several of his relatives had been detained to pressure him to hand himself in. An alert has also gone out to airport and border authorities to prevent him from fleeing the country.
The Rana Plaza complex housed factories that made clothes for western companies, including the British high street retail chains Primark and Matalan.
In London on Saturday, protesters demonstrated outside Primark's store in Oxford Street to demand compensation for the victims of the Dhaka building collapse.
Speaking outside Primark's Oxford Street store in central London, Murray Worthy, from the campaign group War on Want, said: "We're here to send a clear message to Primark that the 300 deaths in the Bangladesh building collapse were not an accident – they were entirely preventable deaths.
"If Primark had taken its responsibility to those workers seriously, no one need have died this week."
Shamshul Huq, junior internal affairs minister, said: "Everyone involved – including the designer, engineer, and builders – will be arrested for putting up this defective building."
Sohel Rana is a local politician connected to the ruling Awami League and reportedly used retainers to intimidate workers who refused to enter the ill-fated building on Wednesday morning.
An alliance of leftwing parties, which is part of the ruling coalition, said it would call a national strike on 2 May if all those responsible for the disaster were not arrested by Sunday.
Wednesday's collapse was the third major industrial incident in five months in Bangladesh, the second-largest exporter of garments in the world. In November, a fire at the Tazreen Fashion factory nearby the latest disaster killed 112 people.
Anger over the working conditions of Bangladesh's 3.6 million garment workers – most of whom are women – has grown since the disaster, triggering protests. Garments account for 78% of Bangladesh's exports.
Hundreds of people were on the streets again on Saturday, smashing and burning cars and sparking more battles with police, who responded with tear gas and rubber bullets. Eyewitnesses said dozens of people were injured in the latest clashes.
Marina Begum, 22, spoke from a hospital bed of her ordeal inside the broken building for three days.
"It felt like I was in hell," she told reporters. "It was so hot, I could hardly breathe, there was no food and water. When I regained my senses I found myself in this hospital bed."
Emdadul Islam, chief engineer of the state-run Capital Development Authority (CDA), said the owner of the building had not received the proper building consent, obtaining a permit for a five-storey building from the local municipality, which did not have the authority to grant it. Another three storeys had been added illegally to the complex, he said.
People near the site of a clothes factory in Dhaka mourn as bodies are brought from the collapsed manufacturing building. Well over 300 people are confirmed dead since Wednesday's collapse, with rescuers saying many bodies are now unidentifiable when discovered. Around 3,000 people are thought to have been inside the building, which some are complaining was known to be structurally unsafe before the fatal accident
Cassie The R&B singer's new mixtape RockaByeBaby is perfection. Download it for free now.
Zara's box blazer Zara always give good blazer, but this one's particularly Emmanuelle Alt'esque. Cut perfectly for a nice bit of shoulder robing, too.
Little Mix's How Ya Doin' A reworking of De La Soul's Ring Ring Ring. We've given up trying to hate it.
Adam Driver Off our screens now Girls is over, but recently cast in "dark family comedy" This Is Where I Leave You. The wait will be tough.
Reflective fabrics Now on Vans x Carhartt collab. At Ashish and Nike for AW13. Time to shine.
Flapper fashion flap Less than a month to go to The Great Gatsby. The pressure…
Marilyn Monroe footwear Launching in September. We'll stick with the actor's favourite Ferragamo stilettos, thanks.
Victoria's Secret 'retirement' age Miranda Kerr has reportedly been dropped by the underwear range and she's only just turned 30. This calls for a hashtag: #wegiveup.
Off-the-peg shirting It's all about bespoke. Start London is now doing made-to-measure for women.
Macaroons Quite nice, but after months of seeing them at every fashion event going, we want cake.
Prime minister and other politicians under fire over response to Rana Plaza collapse as victims' relatives clash with police
The rescue operation at the collapsed building site in Dhaka, Bangladesh took a dramatic turn on Friday afternoon when a fire service rescue team located a large group of survivors in an air pocket on the third floor of the wrecked structure.
The building, which came down on Wednesday was "stacked like slices of bread", said Manzur Ahsan, a fireman. Unable to access the lower floors, army engineers had started tunnelling into the wreckage from an adjoining building.
"We broke through on Friday afternoon and immediately heard cries for help," said Ahsan. "Some survivors struck the concrete with loose bricks to attract attention."
The anxious crowd gathered outside broke into cheers as, one by one, 24 people were brought out alive by army and fire service personnel. By evening, more survivors had been dug out, bringing to 100 the number of people rescued on Friday. A total of 2,300 people have been rescued from the rubble. Rescuers fear hundreds may still be inside.
Among the survivors on Friday was Rehana Begum, a seamstress who worked at the Ether Tex garment factory on the third floor. Even though her left arm was broken, she knew she was among the lucky ones.
"I felt I was buried alive," Begum said through her tears. "I never thought I'd see sunlight again."
Meanwhile pressure was mounting on the government of Bangladesh amid anger at senior officials' reaction to the deaths this week of hundreds of workers in the collapse of the factory making clothes for western companies.
The death toll rose to well over 300 on Friday and was expected to continue to climb as bulldozers were brought in to clear the rubble of the eight-storey Rana Plaza complex in the Savar industrial zone on the outskirts of the capital, Dhaka.
Western retailers including Primark and Matalan have said they had been supplied by factories in the complex.
Up to 3,000 workers may have been in the building when it collapsed at 9am on Wednesday morning. Rescue efforts have relied heavily on volunteers using crowbars, picks and bare hands to clear debris and reach survivors. Firefighters and military personnel were forced to halt operations on Fridayfor two hours after relatives angry at the slow pace clashed with police and teargas was fired in response.
Volunteers were seen holding placards calling for drills, surgical masks and other items. "We're struggling for supplies. We need more help from the authorities," said Mehdi Hassan, a volunteer.
"The police barred us from going near the spot and when we protested, starting hitting us with sticks," said Majid Mia, who had been waiting outside the site for two days hoping for news of his missing daughter, Minara. "When some men pelted the police with stones, they fired teargas," he added.
Elsewhere in Dhaka on Friday, angry garment workers protesting about the Savar tragedy damaged an estimated 100 vehicles in the Mirpur, Rampura and Badda areas while thousands more downed tools. Iqbal Hossain, in charge of Badda police station, said demonstrations had suddenly turned violent.
"We're trying to talk to garment labour leaders to calm the situation," he said.
The tragedy is potentially damaging for the ruling Awami League of the prime minister, Sheikh Hasina.
Local media have criticised statements by Hasina and the home minister, Mohiuddin Khan Alamgir. On Wednesday, Hasina said on TV that the building had been evacuated but some people were trapped after "they went back for their things". Survivors say workers were ordered into the building on Wednesday even though large cracks had appeared in the wall the previous day.
Alamgir was ridiculed on social media after he told the BBC that the building may have collapsed after opposition activists enforcing a general strike "pushed at the gate and columns of the building".
On Friday Hasina bowed to popular demand and ordered the arrest of the owner of the building, Sohel Rana, who is on the run, and the owners of the five garment factories. Rana is a local politician with the ruling Awami League and is accused of exploiting his political influence to flout planning regulations to build the complex six years ago.
"The prime minister has ordered the top officials of the law enforcement agencies to arrest the owners of Rana Plaza and the garment factories operating in the building immediately," said a spokesman for the prime minister.
Rana is also accused of ignoring repeated warnings about the building and forcing factory employees to return to work despite fears that a collapse was imminent.
Officials said Rana was told of dangerous cracks in the building on Tuesday. While a bank in the building closed on Wednesday because of the warnings, the five clothing companies told their workers there was no danger, industry officials said.
"We asked the garment owners to keep it closed," said Mohammad Atiqul Isla, president of the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA).
The booming garment trade is a major foreign exchange earner in Bangladesh and employs about 4 million people. Most of the exports – 60% – goes to Europe while the US takes 23% and Canada 5%.
All political factions actively court the powerful lobby of garment manufacturers and activists say this is what hinders efforts to improve conditions in factories.
A series of accidents at garment factories have claimed hundreds of lives. Only months ago a blaze in a factory without proper fire escapes killed 112.
Bangladesh has been hit by political turmoil in recent months following verdicts on alleged war crimes during the brutal 1971 war of independence by a new tribunal set up by the government. The opposition Bangladesh Nationalist party and Islamist groups have organised vast demonstrations in protest. A campaign supporting the tribunal and calling for harsher sentences has waned in recent weeks.
The political loyalties of the owner of the collapsed complex will give further ammunition to the opposition. On Friday there were further demonstrations and political violence in Bangladesh.
Elections are due later this year and analysts say further instability is likely.
A new breed of fashion obsessed "supercustomer" is challenging retailers' assumptions about the maximum sums that can be spent at the click of a mouse. Luxury online retailer Net-a-Porter.com is preparing to sell its most expensive ever item – a dress with a pricetag of £32,000. Six of the embellished red dresses by Italian label Dolce & Gabanna have been ordered by Net-a-Porter's buyers – and the online boutique is confident that all will sell.
"If we have women in mind for a particular piece then we will go for it and with conviction too. This Dolce & Gabbana dress has been produced in limited quantities and we have bought half of the world's stock," says Ben Matthews, Net-a-Porter's buying manager.
Net-a-Porter isn't the only luxury brand seeing its customers increasingly willing to spend large sums on online purchases. Matchesfashion.com regularly sells vintage Hermes handbags in excess of £25,000 as soon as they come on to the site, while online jeweller AstleyClarke.com admits that it sends out fine jewellery orders of £10,000 "fairly consistently."
"We have experimented with what women will pay," says Ruth Chapman, joint CEO of Matches boutique, which operates both an online and a bricks and mortar business. She identifies a price bracket of items between £2,000 and £10,000 which sell out especially quickly. "Embellished jackets from brands such as Isabel Marant will sell out immediately. A fringed Saint Laurent jacket costing nearly £5,000 sold out within the week." According to Chapman these pieces sell to women who know exactly when they will wear their expensive purchases: "Event dressing is incredibly important to that client's lifestyle."
This trend for searingly expensive online goods compares with this week's news from the high street. Sales figures at Primark have jumped 24%, rising to £2bn in the six months to the beginning of March, with operating profits increasing 56% to £238m. The bargain retail chain deliberately eschews online sales, instead focusing on maximising its high street square footage.
Meanwhile, the luxury end of the fashion industry is engaged in pushing the boundaries of online price resistance. When online fashion shopping was in its infancy, there was an assumption that customers would only buy cheaper items without trying them on; but now, there is both a confidence in and demand for jaw-droppingly expensive online purchases across the high-end market.
Bec Astley Clarke, founder of AstleyClarke.com, says the company is "continually pushing the boundaries of what the online price threshold might be". She partially attributes the changes to international customers, admitting that the company's average order from outside the UK is double that of the home market. Chapman agrees that "online we think about an international customer".
The £32,000 dress in question is somewhat less racy than its pricetag. The Dolce & Gabbana piece has a heavily embellished surface decoration which contrasts with its discreet silhouette. The round necked, knee-length shift dress with three-quarter length sleeves has a timeless "first lady" feel about it. But shoppers hoping that by spending a five-figure amount on a dress they are at least assured exclusivity will be disappointed. With six of the ruby dresses available to buy from Net-a-Porter in September, the fashion lesson appears to be that if you move in the super exclusive circles that the pricetag dictates, you could come a cropper in a high rolling game of fashion snap.
Whether it's an explosion in a fertiliser factory in the US, or the collapse of a factory building in Bangladesh, industrial catastrophe tends to be reported almost as if it's a natural disaster. An individual carrying out a mass shooting or planting a bomb – that's news, that's blameworthy, that's deserving of justice for the victims. But when business is the culprit, fingerpointing is deemed less important. Which is odd, in a way. Humanity may never quite be fully able to say which disturbed and angry people are truly dangerous.
But good management of industrial risk is eminently achievable. An explosion at the West Fertilizer Company in Texas earlier this month killed 14 people and injured many others. Just a terrible accident that could not have been foreseen? Perhaps. But the factory had been fined by US regulators last year for its sloppy safety arrangements, eventually coughing up just $5,250 (£3,400).
In 2006, the factory was investigated after an "odour complaint". It was found to have been using controlled materials without authorisation. The filing of an application to use the dangerous substances legally instead of illegally resolved the issue. In retrospect, these interventions by regulators seem pretty paltry, although the reasons for the accident have not yet been ascertained.
Nevertheless, the factory's parent company, Adair Grain Inc, has been sued by insurance companies on behalf of a number of individuals, in a lawsuit that claims the company "was negligent in the operation of its facility, creating an unreasonably dangerous condition, which led to the fire and explosion".
The collapse of an eight-storey clothing factory in Dhaka this week is a much greater disaster. On Friday, as many as 2,000 bodies had been pulled from the rubble, nearly 300 of them dead. Estimates suggest that there may have been as many as 5,000 workers in the building. Witnesses say they had been told to return to work after reporting that a crack had appeared in one of the walls. One can't help wondering whether the building had simply never been built to withstand the weight of 5,000 people and their machinery.
Clearly, no heed had been paid by management to the deaths of 112 workers in a garment factory fire in a nearby suburb, Ashulia, last November. A day of mourning for the dead was declared in Dhaka, but a few months on, a bigger disaster with greater casualties has occurred. This time, a day of mourning was declared for the entire country.
It doesn't take a rocket scientist to work out what's going on in Bangladesh. It's the second-largest exporter of clothing in the world after China. The secret of success in both countries is that cheap, skilled labour turns out clothes that are of excellent quality, yet retail at sums that are peanuts in the west. Monthly pay in the Bangladesh garment industry can be as little as £25 a month, while £25 can buy two or three nice outfits on the high street in Britain. Primark has confirmed that one of its suppliers worked from the building, while Matalan says it had used companies in the building in the recent past. Again, no surprise. Pressure groups have been trying to name and shame western suppliers into driving up health and safety standards among workers in the developing world for decades now, with some success, but not as much as they'd like to see.
There's a school of thought that believes the ongoing exploitation is all the fault of the fashion industry. But that's not quite true. If you asked fashion designers whether they'd prefer consumers to purchase one or two carefully chosen pieces from high-end collections every season, or an armful of high-street rip-offs every month, they'd counsel strongly for the former. It's a bit like saying celebrity chefs are the reason for fried chicken shops. High street retailers offer a tawdry approximation of crafted, quality fashion-collecting, an experience of whizz-bang consumer gratification that is a little bit desperate, much like a meal from a greasy box that offers some comfort but not much sustenance. Constant treat-shopping is a western hobby, addictive but unsatisfactory. It fills time without demanding engagement or skill.
The everyday horror of post-industrial society is that it deskills and makes passive the people who would once have been making the things that they are now buying in the shops instead. And they can only afford to buy this stuff because people in other countries can't afford to say "no" to making it under conditions now – rightly – considered unacceptable here. People purchase these products because they're at the cheap price that became the nemesis of the former workshop of the world.
Much is made of the capacity of globalisation to spread wealth. In fact, it's a fiendish process that rewards an exploitable population until it gets too big for its boots, then leaves it high and dry, with only the produce of the next group of victims to keep it afloat. Given time, the people of Bangladesh will gain decent working conditions, just as the workers of industrial Britain did. Then they too will be buying cheap clothes made in far-off factories in which they wouldn't work themselves.
What is happening currently is a vast recalibration of human beings and their economic categories. General standards of living are still broadly predicated on the part of the world in which you live. But globalisation spreads relative poverty as well as relative wealth. Eventually, the world's poor and the world's rich will have everything in common with each other and nothing in common with their neighbours and countrymen.
You see it here already, not only in the condemnation of "welfare dependency" but in the demand of business for immigration, however big a headache this makes for politicians. You see it in China's consumer class, who are flocking to the western "affordable fashion" stores such as Zara and H&M that are blooming in Asia like daisies in a park. You see it in the way that two factories, in two parts of the world that could not, on the face of it, have less in common, dealt death one day to a bunch of their employees.
And you see it, of course, in the west's continuing economic struggles, as the balance of power slips from the developed world to the developing world, in a massive structural adjustment. It's a paradox that the European Union is seen as the chief culprit in much of this. Whatever its flaws, it still represents the largest experiment in cross-border equality the planet has ever seen. Yet it has never been less popular among the populations of its member countries. What solution can there be, though, if an attempt to create a level playing field for trade across economically varied nations isn't part of it?
Until humans come to see that systemic economic exploitation is as cruel and dissociated as firing a gun into a bunch of strangers, there will continue to be blood. Lots of blood.
Sixty people have been found alive in the rubble of an eight-storey factory outside the Bangladeshi capital of Dhaka as rescuers desperately tried to reach survivors nearly 36 hours after the building collapsed.
Victims were still calling for help from among the piles of shattered concrete slabs, according to rescue workers and volunteers, as hope began to fade for hundreds still trapped. Officials on Friday said the death toll had reached 275.
Army officers in charge of the rescue operation said an estimated 900 people were still missing after the building collapsed at 9am on Wednesday morning, just as the day's work was beginning.
High street stores including Primark and Matalan have issued statements confirming that companies working in the Rana Plaza complex, in the suburb of Savar outside Dhaka, had supplied them with clothes. Mango said it had placed an order for samples at the factory which was yet to be fulfilled after activists found clothing labels from the Spanish retailer in the debris.
In chaotic scenes hundreds of volunteers combed through the pile of steel and concrete, using electric drills, shovels, crowbars and their bare hands. Outside the complex, hundreds of garment workers gathered, some forming human chains to pass bottles of water and torches to rescuers. Others milled about, angry and tense.
Elsewhere in the Savar industrial zone, around 20 miles from the centre of Dhaka, thousands of workers from the hundreds of garment factories demonstrated against poor safety standards. Television reports said hundreds of protesting workers clashed with police in Dhaka and the nearby industrial zone of Ashulia.
The disaster in Savar is the worst ever for Bangladesh's booming and powerful garment industry.
The exact sequence of events before the collapse is still unclear but it appears local authorities had ordered the building to be evacuated after cracks appeared in walls earlier in the week. A bank on the second floor shut after the warning.
The Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA), which represents manufacturers, also said it asked the factories to suspend work from Wednesday morning.
"After we got the crack reports, we asked them to suspend work until further examination, but they did not pay heed," said Atiqul Islam, the group's president.
However, locals claim that garment factory owners then ordered their workers into the building and sent retainers to intimidate those who opposed the decision.
Offices of the BGMEA in Dhaka were attacked by angry crowds on Thursday.
There are also claims that a second official visited the building but, after a meeting with the owner, said it was safe pending further inspection.
Sohel Rana, a local politician with the ruling Awami League, built the complex in 2007. He has disappeared and has not made any comment about the disaster.
One volunteer, hair white with dust and sweating profusely, kicked at a loose block of concrete in disgust at the poor quality of the building's construction. "There's hardly any iron in this structure," he said. "Look at that, it's just sand and cement."
Rana is also accused of failing to obtain correct permits for the factory from the Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkha (Rajuk), the agency in charge of construction safety in Dhaka. Instead, he obtained nominal permission from the chairman of the local municipality, a political ally, it is claimed.
"It is illegal to construct a building without planning permission," said Emdadul Islam, chief engineer at Rajuk. "The municipality has no right to issue any permissions for construction."
Refayet Ullah, the mayor of Savar municipality, confirmed that his office had issued the permit.
More than 700 garment workers have died since 2005 in Bangladesh, according to the International Labour Rights Forum, a Washington-based advocacy group. But despite promises of reform, say activists, labour laws remain weak and implementation continues to be uneven. No owner has ever been charged over the deaths.
Kalpona Akter, executive director of the Bangladesh Centre for Worker Solidarity, said the political influence of garment manufacturers made life difficult for workers. "There are repeated instances of MPs linked to the garment industry blocking stricter legislation," she said.
Several million shirts, trousers and other garments were produced each year at the complex. Primark has acknowledged it was using a factory in Rana Plaza, but many other retailers listed as clients by firms in the complex distanced themselves from the disaster, saying they were not involved with the factories at the time of the collapse or had not recently ordered garments from them.
Matalan said it used to be supplied by one of the factories at the complex but had no current production there. Benetton said in an email to the Associated Press that people involved in the collapse were not Benetton suppliers. Walmart said it was investigating and Mango said it had only discussed production of a test sample of clothing with one of the factories.
A factory fire in November that killed 112 people drew international attention to working conditions in Bangladesh's $20bn-a-year textile industry.
Bangladesh's garment industry was the third largest in the world in 2011, after China and Italy. It has grown rapidly over the past decade, a boom fuelled by some of the world's lowest labour costs, and now employs as many as four 4four million people, mainly women. The national minimum wage, which was doubled in 2010, is £19 a month.
The Tazreen factory that caught fire in November lacked emergency exits, and its owner said only three floors of the eight-storey building were legally built. Survivors said gates had been locked and managers had told them to go back to work after the fire alarm went off.
The Ethical Trading Initiative, an alliance of businesses, unions and voluntary organisations which aims to improve working conditions, said this week's disaster was "a wake-up call to any responsible brand sourcing from Bangladesh".
"The earlier fire and yesterday's tragedy of the building collapse serves to highlight the chronic state of fire and building safety in the country. It is clear that the building inspection regulations are simply not working. Therefore … it falls to sourcing companies to ensure that at least the minimum standards in fire and building safety are achieved," said ETI director Peter McAllister.
Shariful Islam, 25, who worked on the seventh floor of Rana Plaza as a quality checker, described how he was returning to work after a meeting with production managers and supervisors when he heard a loud noise.
"Immediately we fell several stories. I closed my eyes as the entire place was engulfed with dust. A stitching machine fell on my leg," said Shariful, who was pulled from the rubble by co-workers. "All I could see were dead bodies all around me."
Store sales rise 8% as luxury brand focuses on fastest growing markets with opening of 25 new stores and 10 new concessions
Strong demand for handbags and high fashion in China and Hong Kong helped Burberry to deliver better than expected sales in the first three months of this year.
The brand famous for its raincoats, and with adverts fronted by supermodel Cara Delevingne, said wholesale sales in Europe had slumped as its stores experienced a drop in visitor numbers amid the ongoing economic crisis.
But underlying sales in its stores rose 8% in the three months to the end of March, with double-digit increases in China and Hong Kong. That growth comes despite concerns about a slowdown in growth in China and fears of a financial crash amid high levels of debt within local governments. Ratings agencies Fitch and Moody's have both cut their outlook for the country's debt rating from positive to stable in the last few weeks.
Angela Ahrendts, chief executive, expected the global economic environment to remain challenging but said Burberry was aiming to make the most of "significant opportunities that exist for the brand across geographies and product divisions, with particular emphasis on unlocking the potential of our digital platform and our newly-integrated fragrance and beauty business".
Analysts said Burberry was outperforming rivals such as Louis Vuitton in Asian markets as it continued to deliver attractive items. Louis Vuitton this week posted its lowest quarterly sales growth since 2009.
"Burberry continues to execute well, driving improved conversion, further elevating the brand and improving average unit retail selling prices," said analysts at Nomura.
The company plans to open 25 new stores and 10 new concessions, mainly in China and Latin America, while closing outlets elsewhere as it focuses on its fastest growing markets.
Overall growth at the brand's own stores, which now account for three-quarters of sales, rose in the quarter compared with the previous three months as shoppers bought more of Burberry's most expensive items including its Prorsum catwalk range and the Orchard and Blaze handbags.
Total sales were up 9% in the six months to the end of March to £1.1bn as the company opened 10 new stores including a Chicago flagship, a menswear standalone store in London's Knightsbridge and three stores in Brazil.
Janie Schaffer was due to unveil first collection next month but reportedly resigned after clashing with chief executive
Marks and Spencer's director of lingerie has quit just three months in the job after repeatedly clashing with the company's chief executive, Marc Bolland.
Janie Schaffer, who founded the Knickerbox chain in the 80s and joined from US lingerie chain Victoria Secrets earned the nickname "the queen of knickers" and was described as "an inspirational appointment" when she joined M&S. But it has emerged that she resigned last week – just three days before M&S revealed a seventh consecutive quarterly fall in clothing and homewear sales.
According to senior retail sources Schaffer, 50, first raised concerns with Bolland shortly after arriving in January, complaining that she was not given enough control in her role.
She had planned to unveil her first new ranges in the autumn/winter collection due to be launched next month, which Bolland hopes to use as an opportunity to showcase his new team, which includes a new style director and new head of general merchandise.
One source said: "When she arrived she soon realised that she would not be in control of things like packaging or marketing.
"The marketing is done centrally and she was not given a say in which products were used."
Bolland personally redesigned packaging for a new range of tights without Schaffer's input, the source added.
Another source said: "There was obviously a disagreement in terms of what was expected of her. She repeatedly raised her concerns that she was not given full control over her remit but nothing changed and she had to leave. Bolland tried to persuade her to stay, but she refused."
There had been suggestions from M&S insiders that she left due to a probation period coming to an end, however, it is understood her contract contained no probation clause.
Lingerie is a hugely important area for the retailer, where it has a market share of about 20% and brings in millions of shoppers.
Maureen Hinton, research director at Verdict, said: "Lingerie is by far and away the biggest area in terms of total market share for M&S, although womenswear generates more sales. It is very significant for the business and is a major footfall driver.
"I think the whole point of her being appointed was to breathe new life into the department. A certain amount of her designs might get into the stores, but it will not be a significant amount to make an impression on sales, so her departure must have been a clash of cultures compared with where she was before."
Schaffer is the latest departure from M&S. In the last 12 months the former head of buying for formal menswear, Nick Keyte, has left to go to John Lewis, while Per Una and Limited Collection boss Carole Boyes-Weston also quit . Former childrenswear director Karl Doyle has joined Shop Direct and Richard Price, head of menswear, left to become managing director of BHS.
John Pal, retailing expert at Manchester Business School, said: "This departure just fans the flames of rumour about what is going on at Marks and Spencer, as it has failed to give a clear reason for her exit."
Last year Bolland installed former head of food John Dixon to head of general merchandise, which covers clothing, and former boss Kate Bostock quit. Belinda Earl, the former Debenhams chief executive, was brought in as part-time style director.
Bolland last week said morale was at an all-time high during the company's latest set of results. Bolland and Schaffer declined to comment on Tuesday.
In 2009, Equity opened its doors to models working in Britain's fashion industry and offered them union representation. Four years later, Equity and British Vogue have reached a landmark agreement by signing a 10-point code of conduct governing the treatment of models on photo shoots.
The agreement is the first of its kind among fashion magazines – one that other models and I hope will establish industry-wide standards that revolutionise the way models are treated while they work.
As a model who has worked internationally for numerous brands and magazines, including British Vogue, I have experienced the pitfalls of working in an unregulated business. As someone who, on occasion, has worked 20-hour days and been admonished for so much as asking to use the toilet, the Equity and Vogue code represents a welcome change. For example, Equity's code stipulates a 10-hour maximum workday, where models cannot be expected to work for more than five hours without a break. Equity's code also stipulates that models be allowed time during the day to eat. Provisions such as these seem so basic they hardly require stating, but unfortunately they do.
To many, fashion seems fun and frivolous, and so it follows that modelling is seen more as a privilege than a job. This is wrong. The industry's glossy veneer camouflages the sometimes harsh realities of working as a model, such as lack of financial transparency and no policy of informed consent for jobs involving nudity. The Vogue code stipulates a policy of informed consent for jobs involving full or partial nudity. Most models begin working before they are 16 years old, and "surprise" nude shoots are routine. In an industry that relies on a labour force of minors who know they are highly replaceable and who are often too timid to say no to such demands, this important protection is long overdue.
Fundamentally, the code insists on basic conditions of employment that most other workers take for granted – in particular, that they be paid within a reasonable time frame for their work, be reimbursed for travel to and from jobs on location, and receive workplace insurance. These protections may sound like common sense, but in the modelling industry, unfortunately, they are more the exception than the rule.
That is why last year I established the Model Alliance, a non-profit labour group for models working in the US.
In New York, for example, child models are excluded from most of the protections afforded to other child performers including actors, dancers, and singers, leaving them vulnerable to exactly the kind of exploitation that Equity's agreement explicitly prohibits.
More generally, in the US models are treated as independent contractors, rendering them unable to unionise, and ineligible for protection against minimum wage violations or sexual harassment.
The Model Alliance is working to address these problems. Recently, we launched a petition that seeks to afford child models the same protections as other child performers, and after discussions with us, both American and international editions of Vogue pledged not to knowingly hire models under 16, or who appeared to have an eating disorder. Should Vogue, both the British and American titles, stick to their respective agreements, then the ripple effects will be felt across the industry.
But more is needed. Kudos to British Vogue's editor Alexandra Shulman for recognising that models deserve workplace protection like all other workers, including collective representation. I hope that her colleagues on this side of the Atlantic will follow her lead. The Model Alliance, like Equity, is ready to help.
March fashion sales down 3.4% on same month last year, as some stores ask for deliveries of summer stock to be delayed
Retail grandee Sir Stuart Rose famously said "weather is for wimps", but even the most hardened shopkeeper would have struggled to sell the current crop of springwear, which has sat motionless on clothes rails across the country as Britain endured a chilly early 2013.
High street fashion retailers have resorted to one-off sales and suppliers say some stores have asked for deliveries of new summer stock to be delayed while so many spring dresses, skirts and tops remain unsold.
In March fashion sales slumped 3.4% compared with the same month last year, according to accountancy firm BDO's monthly high street sales tracker. Analysts believe Marks & Spencer, Rose's former company, has suffered a larger drop. Visa's UK expenditure survey suggests the clothing and footwear sector saw a 2.6% year on year fall in March.
Don Williams, head of retail and wholesale at BDO, said: "The weather can have a significant impact on fashion retail, and has undoubtedly had an impact on sales in the last month."
Williams said the cold weather has had its perks – it helped retailers to shift any remaining winter stock, helping to offset poor demand for spring clothing.
On Thursday, Marks & Spencer will be the first of a handful of retailers updating the City in the next few weeks. Marc Bolland, Rose's successor, is expected to say clothes sales were down by up to 5% in the past three months.
However, some analysts have suggested the poor weather could help Bolland, already under pressure to improve M&S's fortunes, because the freezing temperatures have also affected rivals.
The company is already processing its summer offerings, with lead times of around six weeks, meaning current stocks need to be sold to make room. M&S has held flash sales online in an attempt to boost demand. The danger is that consumers could skip spring, and wait to update their wardrobe with summer clothing.
Williams explained: "Retailers fear shoppers will now hold out for summer lines, forcing them to clear spring stock by discounting, hitting even those stores that have continued to maintain tight stock levels and introduce greater flexibility into the supply chain."
It appears suppliers are starting to suffer, with anecdotal evidence that some retailers are asking them to hold off on deliveries. John Miln, chief executive of the UK Fashion & Textile Association, which represents about 2,000 suppliers, said some of his members had been approached, but there was only so much space to store unsold clothes.
He warned: "The danger is all this extra stock could clog the system and the retailers are clearly planning for that blockage to not be terminal, because if there's too much stock then it simply becomes worthless, and that's no good to anyone in the chain."
However, while the high street has suffered, the internet appears to have captured shoppers who would have been outdoors but for the weather.
The website BrandAlley, which sells discount designer label clothes, has snapped up last season's leftover winter stock at a discount. Chief executive Rob Feldmann said: "As an online business we are able to move fast to react to the changing, and unpredictable weather conditions. This time last year we had very strong sales across swimwear and sandals.
"By contrast the last two weeks have seen sales of outerwear soar. We are up 63% on sales of coats and jackets in the last two weeks alone. Sales of sweatshirts and hooded tops have soared over 300%."
Shortlist Media is to launch a digital fashion and beauty title for women, dubbed Never Underdressed, available on smartphones and tablet computers.
The free title will compete with market leaders Elle, Vogue and Marie Claire in the busy women's glossy market when it launches in May.
Never Underdressed is the first UK launch from Stylist owner, Shortlist Media, since the Shortlist spin-off Mr Hyde email in October 2012. Industry sources expect the launch to cost Shortlist Media between £2m and £3m.
Carrie Tyler, the former digital director of Elle, will lead a 14-strong editorial team at the new title, and Lucy Alexander, the ex-digital ad director of Elle, will be its publisher.
Alexander said: "Never Underdressed is a beautiful, glossy, luxury fashion title for the digital era. We are thrilled to bring a range of innovative, immersive new advertising formats that extend across desktop, tablet and mobile and allow brands to deliver consistent, high-impact campaigns across all platforms simultaneously."
Shortlist Media, founded and run by former IPC Media editorial director Mike Soutar in 2007, will launch a French edition of Stylist in print later this month. Its flagship Shortlist had a free print circulation of 531,733 in the six months to December 2012, according to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulations figures – up from 462,731 five years ago.
• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for publication".
• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian on Twitter and Facebook
Manchester's Exchange Square may have been home to a ferris wheel and a giant TV screen, but currently its highest-profile link to high fashion is in the form of the glass-fronted outpost of the Selfridges department store.
All this will change in October however when the square plays host to a prestigious, global celebration of shopping and fashion hosted by Vogue magazine.
For the past four years, Vogue has held its annual 'Fashion's Night Out' in London. The evening sees retailers and shoppers congregate in a recession-busting extravaganza designed to increase footfall in high-end stores.
For the first event in 2009 Chanel held a live fashion show at its boutique on Old Bond Street, where celebrity model Daisy Lowe posed for a shoot designed by Vogue's fashion director Kate Phelan and hairdressers Toni and Guy offered exclusive discounted pamper packages. Each event has grown since, with shoppers treated to goodie bags, discounts and complimentary cocktails.
It's the sort of gathering that I imagine happens frequently in London, the home of UK fashion. London Fashion Week sees the world's most reputable labels flock to the city to showcase their latest designs, and we frequently see photographs of celebrities papped in their finery, splashing their cash in Harrods and the like. So it comes as no surprise that the capital has been the natural stomping ground for an event such as Vogue Fashion's Night Out for the past four years.
But while London has been basking in the limelight, us Northerners have been quietly building a fashion industry of our own. Manchester's Northern Quarter and Liverpool's Bold Street can hold their own when it comes to vintage shops and boutique outlets. Newcastle is often praised for its shopping, as is Leeds, York and Chester. Northern cities have everything London has, just on a smaller scale.
And the North has a pretty good history with fashion. Manchester was the beating heart of a vibrant textiles industry throughout the Industrial Revolution. Without the blood, sweat and tears of our Northern factory workers, the textile trade simply wouldn't have had the legs to support the evolution of British fashion.
Alexandra Shulman, editor of British Vogue, said: "Manchester's importance to fashion is unquestionable. Bringing Fashion's Night Out to its streets is the next logical step in the evolution of Fashion's Night Out in the UK."
The North has produced some of UK fashion's finest talent: Sarah Burton, most famous for designing the Duchess of Cambridge's wedding dress, is from Macclesfield, and learned her craft at Manchester Metropolitan University. Burberry's chief creative officer, Christopher Bailey, hails from Yorkshire.
Selfridges and Harvey Nichols have already confirmed they will be taking part in the Vogue event on 10 October, and galleries, restaurants and museums are also expected to lay on special events. This year, Manchester is taking up its deserved place on the global fashion map and representing the UK as a city brimming with style.
One of Laura Ashley's most senior executives has dismissed accusations of corporate bullying and defended the company's decision to demand a 10% discount from its suppliers – on the same day as it posted a 9% boost in profits.
The interior-design and clothing retailer, renowned for its floral print dresses, has a steelier side, as was revealed this month by the leak of a letter to suppliers demanding an immediate 10% reduction in prices. Sean Anglim, Laura Ashley's chief operating officer, said he sent the letter because the retailer had to stay competitive with rivals.
"I don't think it was wrong to ask for an immediate discount. We need to be competitive on price. Our margin rate has fallen recently and we've done a bit of selective repricing, so we are asking our suppliers to look at where they can create efficiencies in their supply chain."
However, a spokesman for the Forum of Private Businesses – a lobby group that compiles a "hall of shame" naming large companies that squeeze their suppliers – said the retailer's latest figures revealed the business could give smaller firms some leeway. "We think this demonstrates how big businesses are happy to abuse suppliers regardless of their own financial position. A lot of people may have supposed Laura Ashley were in trouble, but their year-end figures suggest quite the opposite," said the spokesman.
"It wouldn't have made it right had they been [in trouble], but to do so having recorded a 9% increase in profits smacks of unfairness. As this case shows, big businesses like this really need to adopt a more ethical approach and look at fairer ways of increasing profit margins without harming small firms who supply them."
Laura Ashley is the latest high-street retailer to be squeezing suppliers after revelations that John Lewis, Debenhams and Monsoon had all demanded discounts.
The controversial letter was sent to suppliers two weeks ago warning the "advent of online-only retailers and marketplaces" meant prices were being driven down. It said: "With this in mind, we are requesting an immediate cost price reduction of 10%. We feel this is both fair and equitable and will save us a process of reviewing our supplier database."
Laura Ashley reported a 9.2% jump in pre-tax profits from £18.4m to £20.1m for the year to 26 January, with sales up 4.5% to £298.8m.
With 212 stores across the country, the business is now attempting to build a successful online presence. Internet sales were up 19.6%, with online business generating 16% of total UK sales, up from 13.8% last year.
Launched in 1953 by husband and wife team Bernard and Laura Ashley in the market town of Machynlleth in Wales, the business started life by selling interior furnishings and women's fashion. Its eponymous founder died in 1985 and the business was listed in the same year. It is now controlled by a Malaysian investment company, which bought it from administrators in 1998.
The business now operates in 28 countries around the world selling items ranging from rugs, blinds, paint and beds.
Squeezed suppliers have also suffered at the hands of John Lewis, Debenhams and Monsoon.
John Lewis sent a letter to its suppliers earlier this year demanding a discount of up to 5.25% if business had increased by 50% or more in the past year and Debenhams told its suppliers there was an "expectation" that they would get a cost reduction of at least 2% retrospectively applied to all ordered due for delivery from 4 March.
The letter said: "This is an increased focus within the business to optimise margins, given the strong trading performance in home and resulting increase in business for suppliers."
Monsoon Accessorize wrote to suppliers in February calling for a rebate of up to 4%.
Fashion can take a hard line on ageing. As women inch into middle and then old age, all sorts of unexpected diktats emerge: hair length, skirt length and the depth of your neckline are all subject to the obscure rules of style. So hitting an elegantly matronly patch at 85 is probably to be expected – although it's still a surprise to see Minnie Mouse in the hands of designer Alber Elbaz for Lanvin, marking the 20th anniversary of Disneyland Paris in a knee-length navy frock with padded shoulders and weighty embroidery. Is there an expiration date on polka dots too? Is my progress to the grave going to be marked by the gradual sapping of pattern from my wardrobe, until tartan and paisley are my only defence against death? Misery.
Instead of her bow, she wears a red crown, firmly establishing this look as "queen mum of cartoon rodents". That sounds about right, actually: with her boyfriend Mickey, Minnie has achieved a dignified position in the Disney constitution, a representative of its respected history without the wearing daily duty of appearing in cartoons. The disconcerting thing is that, apart from the outfit, Minnie doesn't look her age at all. She has the smooth, plastinated look so sadly common to female celebrities whose ferocious resistance to time can't make them look young, but can make them eerily immobile and unreal. Poor Minnie. After all the hours you've spent tolerating precocious preteens at the Club House, you were entitled to your crinkles and creases.
Still, I like her better like this than I did the last time she went out in Lanvin. For its holiday window display last year, Barneys department store in America reinvented Minnie and other august Disney characters in the guise of catwalk models – sinuous hyper-extended limbs and shaved-down hips, dressed in stilettos and a cloud of pink frill. The outfit-critiquing website Go Fug Yourself refers to a "scroll-down fug", when an apparently pleasing get-up is sabotaged by an explosively hideous pair of shoes or unwise application of leggings-as-trousers, but the Barneys' Minnie was something far more upsetting: scroll-up bestiality. Start at the bottom, and it's sexy, sexy, JESUS CHRIST I'VE BEEN OBJECTIFYING A MOUSE. Happy Christmas, pervert.
And anyway, it's nice to see Disney giving Minnie a run at the limelight after years of tyrannical rule by various princesses. It's not just the lady mouse, either: the videogame Epic Mickey, released at the end of 2012, shows that the company is willing to experiment with its heritage rather than keep its original characters as lifeless emblems. With her distinctive silhouette, you can imagine Minnie as a rival to Hello Kitty – the Japanese cat who's as promiscuous in her branding as real cats are in their pissing. Plus Minnie has the bonus of possessing a mouth, making lipgloss tie-ins less disturbingly incongruous. A mature Minnie is OK with me. Just as long as someone tells her that American footballer shoulders aren't de rigeur for pensioners.
H&M has unveiled Beyoncé Knowles as the face of its summer collection in the hope that sales will heat up following a weather-afflicted slump in sales over Christmas and the new year.
The Swedish fashion retailer, which lost its crown as the world's largest to the owner of the Spanish brand Zara two years ago, said like-for-like sales fell 3% between December and February, compared with the same period last year.
It said: "The late spring has had a negative effect on sales, particularly in Europe and North America." The chief executive, Karl-Johan Persson, added: "The first quarter has been characterised by the continued challenging situation for the fashion retail industry in many of our markets." H&M bosses vowed to continue expansion plans into Australia and Chile despite the fifth consecutive quarterly fall in sales, and will open 350 stores by the end of the year, compared with 325 originally earmarked.
They also hope the summer collection, fronted by the former Destiny's Child singer, can boost sales after the successful use of various celebrities in the past including Cindy Crawford, Kylie Minogue and Gary Oldman.
Knowles said: "I've always liked H&M's focus on fun, affordable fashion. I really loved the concept we collaborated on to explore the different emotions of women represented by four elements – fire, water, earth and wind."
Asos, the online fashion retailer favoured by the likes of X Factor judge Nicole Scherzinger and TV presenter Fearne Cotton, shrugged off Britain's economic difficulties to enjoy an impressive 37% rise in sales in the three months to the end of February.
The company, which stocks brands ranging from American Apparel to Warehouse, revealed that UK sales rose a better-than-expected 28% to £59m in the second quarter of its financial year as it benefited from shoppers drifting away from the high street and onto the internet over Christmas.
Nick Robertson, the chief executive who founded the company in 2000, said: "The shift to the internet is stronger than the impact of the downturn."
The shares closed up 7.55% at a new high of £33.55 on Wednesday even though the figures imply that growth has slowed slightly since December, when sales rose 41% after the company cut prices on its own-label clothing.
Robertson said metallic, snakeskin-effect and monochrome outfits were among the bestsellers. "We are pleased the momentum is continuing and if there was one 'silver bullet', it was cutting prices," he said. He added that Asos had benefited because some of the brands it stocked, such as River Island, also trimmed prices, recognising that their young shoppers had less money to spend.
Outside the UK, sales rose 45% to £76.7m for the quarter as Asos launched dedicated websites in France and Germany, its two biggest foreign markets. International sales now make up 59% of the company's revenues, 2% more than a year ago, and it is aiming to launch dedicated Russian- and Chinese-language websites by October.
Asos also intends to boost international sales by launching its mobile-based magazine, Fashion Up, in other languages, including French, German, Spanish and Italian. The company has seen a rapid rise in customers using mobile devices, who now account for 20% of the traffic to its site, up from about 11% a year ago.
Robertson said spending on marketing would rise by £15m this year as Asos also increased the amount it spent on creating magazine-like content in a range of languages for its website, and increased its digital advertising.
He said he was "delighted with our robust first-half performance", and was positive about the outlook for the rest of the financial year.
He admitted that stronger growth in the UK, where sales are subject to VAT, meant the company's gross margin had dipped slightly in the quarter. He expects margins to rise over the full year.
Freddie George, an analyst at the City broker Cantor Fitzgerald, said: "We continue to believe the company will not disappoint with earnings and will achieve its longer-term target of £1bn of sales by 2015."
Shares in Asos have soared in the past year as investors have piled into one of the winners from shoppers' move from the high street to the internet. BestSeller, a Danish retailer, has increased its stake in Asos to about 28%, close to the point where it would have to make a bid for the whole company.
Robertson said there had been no discussions about a takeover and that BestSeller had not made its intentions clear. But he said he did not expect a bid. "I'd like to think they are not in it to own the business, but to be a part of it. They are one of our top two or three suppliers."
Robertson, a great-grandson of the suit-maker Austin Reed, started Asos (which originally stood for As Seen On Screen) when he heard that 25,000 viewers had rung the producers of the Friends TV show desperate to find out how they could buy some of the clothes featured.
On Wednesday the final curtain came down on the biannual global merry-go-round of New York, London, Milan and Paris fashion weeks. The clothes in the 300 or so catwalk collections shown over this four-week period will be in shops from August 2013 until January 2014.
These are the bland facts that underpin the premise of fashion weeks. Show it, make it, sell it, make more. Before the economic depression settled over Europe, its fashion weeks were also about excitement, drama, young designers pushing crazy new ideas and challenging women to express themselves in inventive ways.
But the autumn/winter 2013 collections were not pulling punches, as most brands focused their attention on doing very nice clothes they know their customers will buy, in the best possible way they know how. At Chanel it was all about techno tweeds; at Céline fantastic fluffy coats and knits; Valentino focused on exquisite dresses inspired by Vermeer's Girl with a Pearl Earring; Vuitton's handbags were as luxurious as possible.
For some editors this is not the way forward. "Fashion needs radical concepts, people who are doing new and exciting things," says Sarah Mower, contributing editor of American Vogue and the British Fashion Council's ambassador for emerging talent.
For others, the commercial approach is a quiet revolution. "This season has been about designers and brands returning to their core values," says Grazia's fashion director Susannah Frankel. "I don't think this is boring. If anything, it gives the customer something she can rely on. It is a backlash against the fastness of recent years. What I saw on the catwalks was individual designers at their most authentic, and that to me is exciting."
"In difficult times commercial is good," says Emma Elwick Bates, British Vogue's style editor. "From a Vogue point of view the autumn/winter season has seen the return of real womanly dressing in a Hitchcockian way; all clavicles and cleavage – lots of breast action. But in essence what we have seen is designers focusing on the greatest hits and in turn building a desire for a shopping list of classic winter basics. It sounds obvious but next winter will be about a really great coat, and boots."
Indeed the designer's designer, Miuccia Prada, easily the most revered working today (if you don't count Phoebe Philo of Céline) described her collection as "a lot of things I really like". Hardly revolutionary, but it's not a bad starting point to consider what fashion can be for: namely clothes to be worn and loved.
Paula Reed, the former fashion editor and recently appointed fashion director of Harvey Nichols, has seen the fashion weeks from an entirely new perspective this season. "On a magazine you can talk about ideas – but as a buyer you have to commit to the idea and sell it to a customer. It's a challenge," she says. "London and Paris were the cities with the best ideas, they crackled with energy and excitement. What young London designers can do on a shoestring is awe-inspiring, and if you are looking for innovation, Christopher Kane radiates it."
But Reed summarises that for the new season "You'll want 10 coats. But will have to settle for one, and if you haven't got a polo-neck you're stuffed. Polo-necks underpin everything," she says.
Street style, though, is playing an increasingly important role in the fashion weeks; the proliferation in street-style blogs, and those fashion eccentrics who dress to the nines in order to be photographed have spawned their own trends and their own labels. "When you get to the showrooms, you see that each collection is offering a bomber jacket, a duffel coat and sweatshirts. It's all about reaching those younger customers," adds Reed.
Capturing the youth market is why young New York-based Alexander Wang was hired to take over at Balenciaga; and also why Hedi Slimane was hired for Saint Laurent.
Slimane, with his California Grunge collection managed to be the most controversial designer this season, simply by doing luxury versions of clothes that look like what disaffected teenagers across the world are already wearing.
Alexander Fury, editor of Love magazine, suggests Slimane is: "gleefully carrying on the punk tradition of Yves Saint Laurent himself who when he was fired from Dior in the 60s, it was for showing a leather jacket on the catwalk".
So in a season of refined luxury great coats and polo-necks, Hedi Slimane is the only rebel. There is something rather fitting about that.
Fashionistas queuing round the block, a sell-out designer collection and breathless reviews by the style press. Can this really be John Lewis? As 84,700 partners working at the department stores celebrate their 17% bonus this weekend, they can rest assured they are back in fashion in a big way. A 9% rise in clothing sales helped drive a bumper year for John Lewis as it increased its market share, mainly at Marks & Spencer's expense. The chain accounted for 2.1% of the UK clothing market in 2012, according to retail analysts Verdict, 10% up on a year before.
Once associated with sensible knitwear and cosy slippers, the 40-store chain has polished up its fashion credentials through designer collaborations, classy own-label products and the addition of upmarket brands that had previously steered clear of the store.
As a result, fashion sales topped £1.1bn last year – up from about £700m in 2005. That's still only about a quarter of what Marks & Spencer sells, but it indicates the kind of growth that rivals can only dream of in the economic downturn.
Under the guidance of buying and brand director Peter Ruis, who took charge of fashion in 2007, John Lewis has created a buzz by recognising that shoppers of all ages now want to look trendy – and that older customers no longer want gold buttons and elasticated waistbands.
Sitting in the John Lewis Christmas room surrounded by some very classy Alice Temperley lingerie as well as cute sparkly kids' dresses – and, of course, an array of tweed slippers – Ruis says: "Everything's ageless these days."
John Lewis's Somerset by Alice Temperley range is a case in point. Now in its second season, the British designer's collection is already the store's biggest own-label and its fastest-selling brand ever.
But the fashionistas who line up outside the Oxford Street store and battle for popular items online form a broad church. "We see people in their 50s and 60s wearing it, as well as people in their 20s," Ruis says.
Its new Kin brand also takes on that concept. Its collection of simple, relatively low-cost pieces includes outfits for children similar to those aimed at their parents and grandparents.
Anyway, Ruis says, the department store's fans have been misidentified for years: "Historically we have been told that our customers are more affluent and a bit older, but increasingly our research has shown that to be a bit simplistic."
He says John Lewis has strong market share in all age groups over 25, with a particular "sweet spot" among 35-to-44-year-olds. That demographic includes trendy urbanites who go to John Lewis to buy an iPad and stop to buy some clothes too. The store's combination of homewares, technology, beauty and fashion has, Ruis says, been vital in helping the business through tough times on the high street.
Instead of worrying about ageing shoppers, he sees an opportunity in the fact that people feel less defined by their age: "The 40s and 50s are the prime of life. People are having kids later, and taking out mortgages later."
A stylish and well-groomed 44 with three children aged between four and 11, Ruis is a good example of that modern John Lewis customer. He believes the generation that grew up loving brands such as Topshop, Whistles, Ted Baker and Topman don't feel the need to swap to the classic labels that once formed the backbone of a typical department store.
So in the past seven years, John Lewis has edited out traditional, conservative labels such as German brand Basler and British "mother-of-the-bride" classics Jacques Vert and Alexon, and transformed itself into a kind of indoor high street, but with a grown-up aesthetic.
Ruis say the company works closely with brands to ensure their stock reflects what its customers want: "It's less likely to be the most overt partygoing outfit of a 16-to-24-year-old. Those shoppers have less income, and the higher cost of going to university means there is less and less business there anyway."
John Lewis fashion floors now mix the likes of Jaeger, Hobbs, Mango and Whistles with smaller brands such as Toast and Fenn Wright Manson. Prices have stretched up to Ralph Lauren levels, and down to the cheaper Kin.
Somerset and Kin are the department store's newest and most adventurous creations, designed to suit a different kind of customer from those who would wear the classic John Lewis Collection or John Lewis & Co menswear.
"We have now started to find our feet on own brands. In the first few years we were getting the core range right, but last year we got a bit more feisty and fun," Ruis says. "We have taken the customer with us, and the more fashionable we get, the more interested they become."
He predicts that own-label will move up from about 30% of John Lewis fashion sales today to 35% or 40% as Somerset and Kin expand. This autumn, there will be a 50% bigger range of Kin clothing in stores and Somerset will expand into lingerie for Christmas, as well as cashmere, kidswear and even, eventually, home textiles and electricals.
Ruis is also in talks about bringing in a new designer name for menswear but says that despite the success of the Temperley range, he won't be signing a whole catwalk of collaborators, Debenhams-style. "I'd hate to have 20 or 30 of them and lose our point of view," Ruis says.
The Temperley range hasn't been the only hot success. Ruis says sales of John Lewis & Co menswear shot up 20% after advertising featuring a long-haired bearded model proved controversial. A certain newspaper may have described the model as a "gingery tramp", but Ruis says shoppers were won over by the clothing, and menswear sales increased faster than womenswear over the year.
Ruis, clad in a slimline Burberry Prorsum suit with a Richard James shirt and Grenson shoes, says men are more interested in fashion than they ever used to be. While it was once accepted that 80% of men's clothes were bought by their partners and mums, now men in their 40s are happy to shop for themselves.
"There is no embarrassment about men's fashions now. We used to talk about the pub factor – a man didn't want people to point at what he was wearing, even if as a compliment. Like with men's moisturiser, it isn't an issue any more."
Yet it's not even metrosexual urbanites who are the main drivers behind John Lewis's fashion explosion. What is? The internet, of course.
Sales of clothing in stores rose 3% last year, thanks partly to additional floor space. There are plans to add a further 10% of fashion square-footage by 2020 as John Lewis puts fashion into more stores. But that is all small beer compared with online growth.
In the year to 26 January, online fashion sales increased 41%, and the Temperley range sold three times as much on the internet as it did at the Oxford Street store. Ruis suggests it could have sold more had there been more stock in the warehouse.
There is no doubt that John Lewis's highly effective online operation has brought the brand to a much wider customer base – people who would never have dreamed of buying their dream outfit in an emporium that also sells irons, bedlinen and curtain rails.
Yet Ruis believes John Lewis has just discovered the fashion in its bones. He says it is the story of the partnership and the way thousands of workers get a share of profits that really helped him persuade fashion brands to give the department store a whirl.
"What John Lewis has is quirkiness. It is unorthodox with a slight eccentricity to it. Great British brands of 150 years old work really well with fashion. We have always had that tradition, whether it's Savile Row or Barbour. I always thought it could work well."
H&M, the world's second largest fashion chain, opens its latest retail venture in London on Friday. The store, called & Other Stories, is intended to be a premium brand premised on an female attitude to shopping influenced by social media and blogging.
The 1,200 square metre store on Regent Street is neither a conventional H&M store, of which there are 2,800 in 43 countries, nor one of its more grown-up design-led fashion stores, called COS, which launched in the UK in 2007.
The clue is in the name. Unlike most mid-priced retailers, & Other Stories items, which include beauty products, makeup, shoes, bags, jewellery and clothing, are not inspired by catwalk trends or marketed as "must have" pieces.
"We went to different cities and looked at how the impact of social media, street style and bloggers has made women more fashion savvy," said creative director Sara Hilden-Bengtsson. "Women create looks differently than they did 10-15 years ago. They create their own stories through their personal style and they know fashion."
The concept for the brand, and its website www.stories.com which launched at midnight, came from the notion of women creating their own look inspired by multiple, often personal, sources such as eBay, their parents of grandparents wardrobes, thrift stores and fashion brands.
After hitting upon the idea for the brand three years ago, H&M hired a group of designers and other creatives, 70 in total who are split between Stockholm and Paris (including a few from cult Swedish brand ACNE) to create these "stories" as collections for the store.
The store creates a series of clever edits, so that customers can easily achieve the spontaneous "I just threw this look together" attitude, popularised by bloggers. "Contradiction and Minimalism" for example features a leather dress, and a small selection of shoes, bags and jewellery that will work with it. There is nail polish to match iPhone holders and lipstick glosses to match jewellery.
These co-ordinated looks act like an in-store stylist, with items set out as they might be on a magazine page. "We have found women to be so much more educated about fashion, they know what they want before they leave the house to shop," says Colombe Campana, the brands ready-to-wear designer. "And she could be anyone, the only thing that binds together the women who come through our door is that she loves fashion."
The fashion at & Other Stories is strong. A pink midi dress with slouchy shoulders that hits below the knee is £65, an on-trend neoprene clutch bag is £19 while platforms sandals for £75 will satisfy the street style crowd. The & Other Stories design team have also considered women who are looking for essentials, such as smart black trousers or a trench coat, which have been cut in contemporary shapes.
Next week, a second store will open in Copenhagen with others planned for Berlin, Paris, Barcelona and Milan. H&M clearly believes it has hit upon a fresh way to sell fashion.
Paris fashion week got into its swing on Wednesday evening at the Musée Rodin, not with conceptual couture dresses but with clothes costing as little as £9.99.
H&M, the Swedish high street brand known for its blockbuster designer collaborations, made its Paris catwalk debut with a largely monochrome autumn collection, featuring furry jackets, embroidered tunic dresses and fancy capes, worn with fishermen's caps and knee-high boots.
Despite showing on the catwalk, this was a wearable collection with no gimmicks. The style of garments shown will retail at similar prices to the normal H&M range, except for some of the showier pieces – made from slightly more expensive fabrics – such as the black wool flared miniskirt with embroidery and a black velvet cape featuring epaulettes.
Similar attention to detail elevated other pieces, such as the black wool cropped peacoat, finished with a vintage cuff, and the grungy long black bias-cut dress with leaf appliqué and embroidery.
"When we started thinking about this collection we talked about drama – a kind of modern drama," said Ann-Sofie Johansson, head of design at H&M, during a preview of the collection. "There is a lot of tailoring but with a little bit of a bohemian feeling."
Tomboy and Russian elements were also thrown into the mix, though essentially this collection was about "a gang of girls dressing up", Johansson said, adding: "Borrowing things from their boyfriend's wardrobe, maybe their grandmother's, and mixing them together to make an effortless and cool look. It's nothing new really, but it makes fashion fun."
This is the first H&M catwalk show for its mainline label since a 2005 show in New York. But the brand is no stranger to high-end fashion opportunities. Last weekend it dressed actor Helen Hunt in a blue strapless gown for the Oscars, and it has also staged collaborations and events with Stella McCartney, Karl Lagerfeld, Versace, Maison Martin Margiela and Lanvin.
The spring/summer grunge couture collection of Belgian designer Dries Van Noten was one of the strongest shows of last season and his followup for autumn/winter was similarly impressive.
On Wednesday afternoon, with 10 ornate chandeliers suspended above the ballroom at the Hotel de Ville, the designer continued to explore his winning formula of mixing masculine with feminine, using a clever clash of tailoring with feathers and acid-hued embroidery.
The show opened with a navy overcoat with pink embroidery snaking around its front and cinched with a thin metallic belt, styled with grey tailored trousers and flat lace-up shoes.
Other masculine touches included pinstripe suiting, fuzzy, grungy V-neck jumpers, which looked as if they had been taken straight from the last men's collection, and collegiate striped scarves.
Backstage, Van Noten said he had started with a man's wardrobe – flat shoes, men's trousers and shirts – and then thought what was the opposite?
This brought him to ballroom dancing and ice skating, and Fred [Astaire] and Ginger [Rogers]. "It was all those ideas of female embellishments invading the menswear," he said.
This ballroom idea was realised with marabou feathers and sparkling costume jewels. A pink top and yellow skirt combo was festooned with mini explosions of marabou and jewels sprouting from the surfaces, while elsewhere the feathers, used in a more subtle black, gave trims or adorned evening dresses. But these feathery looks never veered into camp territory, such is the skill of Van Noten's sensibility. Fringe, fuzzy fur and floral patterned suiting also added bite.
Bobbi Brown had a fairly typical week in her frenetic globetrotting life: she was flown from her New Jersey home to create the "visage" at L'Wren Scott's debut show for London fashion week. The following day, the founder of the eponymous cosmetics business headed back to Washington for lunch with Michelle Obama, a friend and client. Afterwards, it was back to her global HQ in SoHo, New York, for a couple of days, then on to meet her architect husband and one of their three sons in the Rockies for some weekend skiing.
Just before she flew back to the US, Brown, 55, showed me a photograph of her posing with friend L'Wren Scott, a 6ft 3in model turned designer, and her boyfriend, Mick Jagger. She was delighted that the picture had been tweeted by the Rolling Stones star to his 330,000 followers and had appeared on numerous websites.
But, like so many women, she sought reassurance on her appearance. The diminutive (she just nudges 5ft) entrepreneur adjusted her bookish specs as she looked at the image on her iPhone and quietly asked me and her trusted PR director if she looked fat. Fat?! This is a healthy, successful, attractive, inspirational role model with curves in all the right places and skin that glows with the translucent flush of an eight year-old skipping in the fresh air.
However, it was reassuring that even the proponent of a movement called Pretty Powerful, created to celebrate the diverse and unique beauty in all women, isn't always aware of the radiance she emanates.
"All women have insecurities," she says matter of factly, sipping ginger tea. "Supermodels and Hollywood actresses confide they don't like parts of their face or their body: they tell me they felt gawky or didn't like being different to other women. I'm lucky, I know how to use makeup and I've had the benefit of working with some incredible designers and stylists over the years, who've given me valuable advice on dressing to suit my body and my lifestyle."
It has become a mission of Brown's to share that experience and knowledge with women around the world, empowering them through their appearance. For the last 13 years, she and her employees have worked closely with the American charity Dress for Success, which helps unemployed women get back into the workplace through mentoring and transformative makeovers. Brown serves on the worldwide board and her business supplies an army of makeup artists to teach the women who come to the charity for help. The company donates makeup kits to them and gives $25,000 each time Brown hosts a slot on the QVC shopping channel. To date that amounts to more than $2m.
Next week, a formal corporate partnership with Dress for Success London will be launched in Britain. Based in Islington, north London, the small-scale venture – where Samantha Cameron volunteered in 2010 – helped 1,250 women last year. That's a fraction of the 1.09 million women unemployed in the UK, but Brown hopes that, by raising awareness of the scheme and supporting it with practical resources and funds, it might grow to be as prolific as the US operation.
"It's so incredible to see these women, who have often been out of work for years, be given a chance again," says Brown. "Often they've had to deal with challenging circumstances such as divorce, redundancy or drug addiction, and they're trying to get their lives back on track, but they don't have the wherewithal to make it happen. Their self-esteem is at rock bottom, and even if they have relevant qualifications and résumés they just don't have the confidence to sell themselves as the right person for the position. If you don't feel good about yourself, how can you expect others to invest in you?"
When these women go to Dress for Success, they have a session with a trained stylist who helps put together an outfit, with accessories, that makes them feel good (they get to keep it). "Then we teach them how to do their makeup so they look polished and professional," says Brown. "With that, they feel they can accomplish anything. It changes their life."
When Brown was growing up in the 60s, she was surrounded by images of cookie-cutter blonde, blue-eyed, tanned Californian beauties. The complete antithesis of this, Brown didn't feel beautiful until the day she watched Ali MacGraw in Love Story, when she was 14, and experienced an epiphany. "I suddenly realised that beauty comes in so many shapes, sizes, colours and ages. I started to see the positives in my own appearance and my confidence grew as I learned that I could make the best of the hand Mother Nature had dealt me. When I began working as a makeup artist, I loved the way that I could really help to transform other women, boosting their self-esteem by doing so."
Today Brown's disciples use their skills to help women experience that same epiphany. "I see that moment all the time in my work," says Georgina Pelosi, one of Brown's top makeup artists based in the UK. "It's not about me telling women how I think they should look, but about helping them learn techniques to make the most of the features they like. It's incredibly rewarding being able to bring about that transformation."
"I can look people in the eye for the first time in years," wept a woman of 29 I spoke to last week, after she had experienced a Dress for Success makeover.
"When you look in the mirror, all you see is your imperfections, but George helped me focus on the positives," said Julia, a 25-year-old law graduate. "When you've done 50 applications and you've been rejected 50 times, this is the thing that can make the difference. I know I've got skills, but I couldn't sell them because my confidence had been destroyed. Now I'm going out fighting."
Johanna K, 32, says: "I have a degree in business finance and was working for London Underground when I went on maternity leave five years ago. I gave birth, then split with her father after a long-term abusive relationship. He had told me I was ugly, fat, pointless… I just felt I had nothing to contribute to society.
"I had been looking for work, but wasn't getting anywhere when, about a year ago, I was referred to Dress for Success. Having a stylist and a makeup artist take the time and trouble to help me find myself again was a huge turning point. I wouldn't be in the job I'm in today, working in a university, without that help, because it gave me the confidence to face the world."
In these enlightened times of workplace equality, it can be hard to reconcile the idea of appearance being relevant in a woman's bid to get a job. Yet Ffion Griffith, global human resources director at international law firm Olswang LLP, says it is crucial women are confident about their appearance at interviews, though not for the obvious reasons.
"You need to know that you look your best, that your makeup is so well applied and subtle it isn't even noticed. The more you focus on getting it right, the less attention your interviewer will give your appearance because you will be comfortable and confident about the way you look and you'll focus on your skills and experience. Your appearance should become almost invisible, just leaving an overall impression of polished professionalism."
Delyth Evans, executive director at Dress for Success London, says: "Our role is to empower women to look in the mirror and feel confident they are smart and capable of doing the job. When they come to us they are usually suffering very low self-esteem, and have lost – or never had – the ability to believe they can succeed. They come with no expectations because they have been trying to find work and failed. They're desperate: you can see that from the way they carry themselves, the way they behave and the way they talk about themselves.
"Many women we see have very negative body image, and find the experience of shopping depressing. We treat them with real empathy and respect when we do the wardrobe and makeup sessions. They start to smile and we see different body language and the first signs of confidence coming through. It's naïve to think appearance doesn't matter, so we help them get it right. And that can have incredible consequences."
"You're off your rocker." That was the response Nic Haralambous got when he tried to find a manufacturer for his designer sock business. And on the surface, they were right. Haralambous, 28, is a South African tech entrepreneur who has just sold his latest company, Motribe, to instant messaging giant Mxit for an undisclosed sum. But until recently, he knew nothing about the fashion industry. And besides, manufacturers said, no-one will pay R99 (£8) for a pair of coloured socks.
But Haralambous is persistent. He finally found a manufacturer who would make him some samples. He put photos of the socks online. A month later, NicSocks had sold over 1,000 pairs, not just in South Africa, but to customers as far afield as the US and France. The company sells limited-edition socks with colourful geometric designs, either as one-off buys, or by subscription – those who sign up get two pairs every two months. The socks are made from bamboo, because Haralambous wants his socks be environmentally friendly and entirely made from local materials.
Haralambous had long since discovered that his penchant for wearing colourful socks was a good conversation-starter at investment meetings. "I've been wearing a brand called Happysocks for three years. When I was pitching to investors it became my thing: the sock guy. A little business trick I used to get people to remember me."
And so, while Haralambous was sitting at home waiting for the Motribe deal to be finalised, he started thinking about how expensive designer socks were – brands such as Paul Smith and Ben Sherman retail in South Africa for close to R600 (£50). And he thought: I can do better.
"On my website, I call my designs foundations," says Haralambous. "I believe socks are the foundation of the style that men choose to wear." There's a rich history of colourful socks in fashion, going all the way back to 18th-century dandies, whose delicate, embroidered socks were a crucial part of their outfits. "Socks, like underwear, are an essential part of a man's wardrobe," says Max Berlinger, the contributing style editor for Esquire.com. "They serve an internal purpose, one that isn't seen by many. I've built whole outfits around a pop of colour through a sock, but I don't know if many other men can say – or would admit – the same. But, in the same way that wearing a particular sweater can be pleasing, I think that a lot of men can derive a certain pleasure from wearing a particular item of clothing, like a brash pair of socks, even if that piece isn't in the spotlight."
Designer socks-by-subscription is not a new idea, companies such as Blacksocks, Sock Rush and many others have been doing it for years. Blacksocks' Sockscription programme has been running since 1999. And neither is Haralambous' transition from tech to socks unique: the tech startup scene, particularly in the US, has been a great market for designer sock merchants, according to New York Times journalists Claire Cain Miller and Nick Bilton.
But Haralambous's company is the first subscription sock company in Africa. "In South Africa, and a lot of other countries, I don't think these companies are as well known as they are in Europe," he says. "I'm doing it locally, which there is a big need for here. The subscription model isn't new, but it isn't very well expanded either, and the socks by subscription that are locally produced and environmentally friendly is quite unique in itself."
Subscription services such as NicSocks, says Berlinger, are enjoying their time in the sun because they make it easier for men to shop. But not everyone is keen. Robyn Cooke, whose Style Guide Cape Town is regarded as one of the country's top fashion blogs, says that socks-by-subscription has limited appeal. "From a strictly fashion perspective, the socks-by-subscription model is this season's Wine of the Month club. Some people will like it for a while, but are pretty unlikely to fall in love for ever."
Haralambous says: "I think the fashion industry in South Africa is very used to doing things in a specific way, with specific people turning out specific designs. They are complacent, and they need to be disrupted. The online space is going to disrupt the fashion industry in South Africa, even if it takes five years. I'm getting in early enough so I'm the leading disrupter."
I am distressed by the lack of moral panic that London Fashion Week has brought with it. It's like having Christmas with only presents, and nobody worrying about consumerism, or Easter with only Creme Eggs, and nobody worrying about whether or not they were getting smaller. How will we even get to hell, if nobody is going to maintain the handcart?
Here's the thing: models are no longer dangerously thin. They still, to the untrained eye, look pretty thin. I'd imagine they're certainly thin enough to count as unattainable role models, simply by dint of the fact that, if the average body mass index is 25.9 in this country, which is marginally overweight, a model-type physique would not be a realistic goal.
But there were always two lines of attack on the catwalk – the one that said the models themselves were being exploited, their need to work set against their human appetite, their youth used against them for its pliability; and then the one that found the real victims to be the spectators, also young women, to whom the parade of these mannequins was a tortuous reminder of their own normality. No industry should need a constantly replenishing stable of victims, ran the first argument; no culture should be dominated by images that engender feelings of worthlessness in its audience, ran the other.
I agree with the first, and in regards to the second, can't see how you'd have heroines at all (chic or not) who didn't engender feelings of worthlessness in somebody – being models, even if they are not thinner than you, they are probably more beautiful. The only way out of this conundrum would be to elect models by lottery, so that designers were never able to choose whether they were beautiful or not, nor how thin they were, and it would then be their challenge to make them look good all the same.
But fashion at this level isn't really about what people look like, it's more about creating art, and in doing so building the whirlpool effect that will pull the market in the direction of your other, more wearable wares. The models aren't meant to look like real people any more than the clothes are meant to look like real clothes. This lottery wheeze would never have worked. Phew. Thank God nobody suggested it at the time.
In all the debates about size zero, the campaigners for normal and plus-sized models were never clear, I didn't think, about whether they were fighting for models-as-victims or consumers-as-victims, most likely because it suited their cause for the whole business to look like one amorphous mass of deliberated anorexia-creation. But the industry did pick its way through the matter quite carefully, realising that to look utterly careless would be bad for business, and yet they couldn't afford to just roll over to my models-by-lottery agenda. When the outrage hit its height in 2007, some major fashion houses banned the size zero model altogether. The British Fashion Council never signed up to that, preferring the Health Initiative , which found, following a "model health inquiry", that so long as models were healthy, you didn't need to go around calipering them the whole time to make sure they weren't being chewed up by the system.
Since then, the issue is settled by coincidence and the news cycle – last year, Samantha Cameron was at the Erdem show where a model appeared who did look a bit cadaverous. Consequently, photo agencies had the first lady's sombre chops poking out behind a pair of jutting shoulder blades, and the story "Sam Cam not impressed by size zero" was a shoo-in. Nothing so fortuitous has happened this year. Heroin chic has been replaced by the less controversial "tired chic" – makeup artists at the Ashish Gupta show were going for a "beautifully tired" look. They wanted the models to look like "space farmers", they clarified.
Some fashion people disagree, and say that the average size of a model has fractionally increased; that's almost impossible to falsify. Well, I hate to use a word so prosaic as "impossible" about this kerazy business, but I would properly love to see someone try to discover the aggregate body mass index of London Fashion Week via a freedom of information request.
Fashion may have undertaken some basic self-regulation and kicked out the girls at the farthest edges of emaciation, but I feel moderately safe in saying that nothing has changed except the conversation. If you tried to construct a Venn diagram of "tired", "on heroin" and "thin" for the modelling aesthetic, it would be all intersection and no circle. The look is still the same. The models are still the same, except they're five years younger. The story of body weight has been an ultimately fruitless search for a victim, which briefly united a set of opinions that would never otherwise be seen dead together.
The branch of feminism that holds it to be important for all role models to be realistic for all women was briefly united with respectable opinion that takes a visual reference to drug use as a deliberate insult. The people who hate the spectacle of wealth, the frivolous spending on outlandish pointlessness, but are not quite priggish enough to be honest about what they're objecting to, found their underdog on the catwalk itself, images of beauty that in another era (also in different clothes) could just as well be images of starvation, and underline the inequality that this carnival of spending subsists upon.
Speaking to CNBC after Burberry's autumn-winter catwalk show at London fashion week, CEO Angela Ahrendts gives a firm backing to British manufacturing. Many of the heritage fabrics shown on the catwalk were made in Britain. 'It's been a key part of our strategy as we've transformed the company,' she said
Say you were to walk into a London fashion week catwalk show today and order everyone to undress (this is hypothetical, by the way – please don't), an inventory of which high-street label is most worn by the fashionables would, I suspect, surprise many. Topshop would be well represented, naturally, especially the tuxedo trousers, and the so-on-trend dungarees, and the JW Anderson knits (the high-street fashionista's answer to a Jonny Saunders). Cos and Whistles would be punching well above their retail square footage. But the name you'd find over and over again, from the front row to the standing section, in shoes and tailored jackets, in subtle navies and greys as well as this season's lemon sherbet bright? Zara.
Zara has become everyone's favourite fast fashion hit, and the watercooler fashion name to drop. These days, it provides a rich seam of instant small talk between women who like clothes, crossing boundaries of age, class and style. The Duchess of Cambridge wore a blue Zara dress the day after wearing McQueen for her wedding. Coleen Rooney mixes Zara with her designer wardrobe. Mary Berry (77) and Selena Gomez (20) have both worn Zara on TV recently. Samantha Cameron wears Zara to Conservative party conference; the Saturdays wear Zara to go clubbing.
Last month, invited to a smart industry dinner during the Paris haute couture shows, Grazia's senior fashion features editor, Katherine Ormerod, chose from her packed wardrobe her most recent trophy purchase: a striking, broad-striped monochrome Zara blouse. It was "super-chic and on-trend, and it cost only £39.99. But my smugness was soon dented when a French journo arrived wearing the exact same thing, and then an Italian PR in the same blouse in a different colourway. There were only 20 of us around the table and I was obviously – cringingly – seated next to my twins."
The Zara-twin moment has become a frequent fashion week banana skin. Nicola Rose, fashion director of Red magazine (most recent Zara purchases: cream cable-knit sweater with back zip, black kitten heels, sweat top), has a wardrobe stocked with Marni and Miu Miu, but says, "All the fashion insiders top up their wardrobe with something from Zara." Her colleague Emily Gegg, Red's executive fashion director (most recent purchase: black sleeveless blazer), calls Zara "the fashion industry's staple".
Zara's ascendancy to fashion's top table began towards the end of the last decade, as fashion changed direction away from dresses and towards separates. A gradual tidal pull away from the stand-alone trophy dress and towards a wardrobe based on jackets, blouses, trousers and skirts worked in Zara's favour for two reasons. First, the store was among the first on the high street to master production of the new structured jackets at an affordable price. Lily Russo, shopping editor of Grazia, pinpoints the season "when Balmain first sent models down the catwalk with sharp-shouldered rock chick blazers" as the moment Zara got a grip on the fashion zeitgeist.
But there is a second and more fundamental reason the current mood of fashion – in which our wardrobes are steered by the chic, understated, piece-by-piece minimalism pioneered by Stella McCartney and Phoebe Philo at Céline – has benefited Zara. Zara has a unique design model, carefully calibrated to be responsive to what the customer is buying in store. Every single garment on sale in Zara is designed by a 350-strong team at its parent company, Inditex, based in La Coruña, Spain. Between them, they produce more than 18,000 creations a year, from shoes to sweaters, from T-shirts to coats. Although some pieces are manufactured in Morocco or China, most are made in Spain, a proximity that allows for the fastest possible turnaround time.
"This fashion-creating cycle has nothing to do with the catwalk cycles, which show very different proposals of trends several months in advance," Jesus Echevarria, Zara's communications director, tells me. "Zara reacts directly to the customers' tastes for specific trends created by the in-house team. This is the real inspiration for the design team: the choices that everyday customers take in the stores."
Zara's secret weapon is the way in which information harvested on the shopfloor is put to use. If a deep V-neck sweater is selling better than a scooped one, the design team will set to work producing variations on the V-neck. Sales of these will be monitored, and the most successful produced in quantity. "This information reaches the design team, which reacts always with only one thing in mind: what the customer is really wanting. They must be in the skin of the customer. All the organisation is structured towards this aim."
If Echevarria is bullish to the point of evangelism about his business model, the statistics back him up: last year, Zara posted profits of £1.3bn. Amancio Ortega, Inditex's owner, recently leapfrogged Warren Buffett to become the fifth richest man in the world.
Zara's newest and smartest London store, facing the gigantic Marks & Spencer flagship at Marble Arch, is a notably different shopping experience from any of its Oxford Street competitors. The music is quiet and anonymous. There are few images of models wearing the clothes; instead, there are endless mirrors. The atmosphere is less about a social experience and more akin to being inside an enormous, upmarket walk-in wardrobe. It is the perfect environment for a store such as Zara, whose success is built on understanding the shopping impulses of the customer. An "intimate environment in which women are encouraged to assemble their own outfits" is how Inditex describes the new store. On a weekday afternoon, the customers are mostly women shopping alone, although a few are with friends or grown-up daughters. There are mums in parkas pushing sleeping toddlers in buggies, and women in suits with one eye on the time. A woman with a taupe-coloured Céline handbag is browsing next to one clutching two Primark carriers.
Zara's lofty insistence that it does not follow the catwalk is not entirely borne out by the shopfloor. Only the day before, I was admiring photos of the houndstooth check separates designed by Raf Simons for the Christian Dior pre-fall collection, and here, by remarkable coincidence, are a pair of houndstooth cropped trousers (£39.99). An abundance of thick black-and-white striped pieces closely echoes the look seen on the Marc Jacobs catwalk; a black cocktail dress with a stiffened waterfall ruffle is a striking reminder of the current Givenchy collection. A press officer for a prestigious Parisian fashion house told me, on strict condition of anonymity, that she is always pleased when Zara stocks variations on her brand's collection, because even at a discount she can't always afford the real thing – and Zara, she says, "even fools people in Paris".
For key looks, Zara will sell multiple variations on a theme. For instance, I find myself looking at a rack of blazers, in panels of matt black and shiny black viscose. Some have subtle textured navy panels, some have piped edges. Some have flat collars, or notched lapels; some have satin tuxedo detailing. Not since the days of visiting the dressmaker have women's individual preferences been so well catered for at mass market level. In recognising these small differences, Zara flatters the customer's taste. And choice is a smart selling tactic: after flicking through the racks for a few minutes, I realise I have stopped wondering if I should try on a jacket and started wondering which jacket I should try on. (For the record, I bought the one with navy panels. In three outings, it has racked up compliments in double figures.)
There is, of course, a good deal of what I would nontechnically describe as tat. A black lace dress that is cheap and flammable; a street market-esque printed T-shirt. Nicola Rose won't touch the trousers, because "the fabrics just don't work for me. I am very particular about wools and cottons." And the size range can be narrow. Lily Russo says, "I am a size 12 and sometimes a 'large' skirt or trousers doesn't fit. My sister is a size 16 and it would be great if they catered for that size also."
A week and a half later, I make a return trip to Zara. The wide monochrome stripes that dominated the first floor last time have been superseded by abbreviated slim trousers, boyish blazers, silky blouses: a look that closely echoes Hedi Slimane's first collection for Saint Laurent, which recently arrived half a mile away on Bond Street. My navy-panelled blazer has vanished, and I am instantly gratified that I bought it on first sight. (Zara shoppers learn this lesson fast, which helps swell coffers.)
For a generation who have grown used to grazing on fast fashion like hummingbirds on sugar, Zara is addictive. I popped in only to have a quick scout; five minutes later, I'm back in the changing rooms. I'm hooked. Aren't we all?
The J Crew formula is to the 21st century American fashion industry what the secret Coca Cola recipe was to the fast-food wars of the last. Everybody loves the taste – but only a few people know the secret, and they're not telling.
J Crew has claimed wardrobe bragging rights over the American zeitgeist to a degree not achieved by any high street store since Gap in the 1990s. (It is no coincidence that Mickey Drexler, who masterminded Gap in its khaki-and-white-shirt heyday, is now CEO of J Crew.) Michelle Obama and her daughters are famous fans, while Anna Wintour describes the brand as "a force to be reckoned with, and anyone who tells you otherwise is insane".
Later this year, J Crew comes to Britain, with a 17,000-sq ft store slated to open in Regent Street, London, the brand's first outside North America.
The J Crew look – bright colours, jazzy costume jewellery, rich eveningwear textures used in daywear – could not be more different from the Gap look, but the dynamite secret is the same: the label has found a way to make casual clothing aspirational. In America, where folksiness is next to godliness, J Crew's accessible brand of glamour is a winning formula. ("Don't forget to smile. Mickey wants the girls to look friendly," a stylist with a lint roller in his jean pocket could be overheard reminding the models.)
"The colours, the mix and the styling" are how Tom Mora, head of womenswear design, pinpointed the appeal of the label at the New York fashion week presentation of the autumn collection, which will be the first to go on sale in the UK. Colour is key to the J Crew look. (Drexler is said to insist on yellow always being in eyeline when a customer enters the store, not because it sells but because it is a cheerful and eyecatching shade that sets the tone for the shopping experience.)
Purple, burgundy, pink and cobalt dominate for autumn, with rich saturated colour mixed with intricate pattern and delicate embellishment. Mora credits a trip to Marrakech for inspiring the collection: "The deep colours against the desert landscape… stood out in my mind. We created bold prints, used lush fabric textures and intricate beading and applied them to our idea of classic American sportswear."
The mix is a crucial element of J Crew's appeal. At the show, navy cropped trousers with an orange windowpane check were styled with a midnight peacoat slung over a grey cashmere knit, layered over a white shirt with diamante collar. The sparkle of the collar was echoed by silver ankle strap shoes; the lip gloss shade picked out that of the burgundy envelope clutch. The formula of mix-and-match is carefully calibrated for maximum effect, and enhanced with tips borrowed from the modish streetstyle blogs: the messy bun, the statement sunglasses, the shoulder-robed jacket.
The high level of design looks likely to impress British customers. A lilac wool coat combined Donegal tweed with a tonal herringbone used on the sleeves and lapels, the use of two similar fabrics adding a level of interest and texture to make the piece stand out from other high street offerings.
• This article was amended on 15 February 2013 because the original said the J Crew store expected to open in London this year would be the first outside the US. That was incorrect as there are J Crew stores in Canada.
At any fashion week worth its salt there comes a pivotal moment when the gauntlet is thrown down with a display of clothes so shocking that they challenge the status quo and forge a new direction for fashion.
At New York fashion week, this moment came not during the presentation of a little-known designer of avant-garde dungarees, but at a press conference in the very heart of the artistic establishment, the Metropolitan Museum.
The event was the launch of the forthcoming exhibition Punk: Chaos to Couture. As Andrew Bolton, curator of the museum's Costume Institute, took to his Upper East Side podium he was flanked on his left by the infamous Two Naked Cowboys T-shirt by Vivienne Westwood and Malcolm McLaren, which caused artist Alan Jones to be arrested for indecency while wearing one walking through Piccadilly Circus in 1975. On Bolton's right was the Versace "safety pin" dress that transformed Liz Hurley into A-list star overnight in 1994.
Punk "prized originality and individuality above all else", said Bolton. The museum's celebration of punk, which opens on 9 May, is notable for arriving in the city at a time when many critics of the New York fashion scene feel it has become polite, commercial and timid – in other words, the very antithesis of punk.
Cathy Horyn, fashion editor of the New York Times, wrote of the city's catwalks that it was "shocking to see the lack of energy and imagination … At a time when the talent in Europe is especially strong – Christopher Kane, Raf Simons at Dior, Phoebe Philo at Céline, to mention a few – the flabbiness of New York is puzzling."
In this context, the punk exhibition will be seen by some as a call to arms for American fashion. Nick Knight, creative consultant on the exhibition, said at the launch that "the visceral power of punk is that it is not about people following what other people are doing, it's about people doing something their own way. If there's a message then that's it: don't wait for someone else to tell you what to do."
The exhibition will feature more than 100 designs that trace how high fashion has "appropriated the brutality" of punk since its origins in the 1970s, said Bolton. Key exhibits include an Alexander McQueen corseted ball gown from 2008, the silk bodice of which is patchworked with fragments of the face of the Queen with a safety pin through her nose, and a 1994 Moschino dress that borrows a strapless, feminine silhouette from 1950s couture but is rendered in black rubbish bags rather than the traditional taffeta.
There is, however, a less maverick explanation of the decision by the Met to take punk as its theme for the annual Costume Institute show. Last year's exhibition, Schiaparelli and Prada: Impossible Conversations, closed with a disappointing total attendance of 339,838. The high-concept conceit of that show, which centred around an imagined discourse between two designers who never met, did not translate into box office appeal. The Met, wishing to recapture the momentum that saw record figures of 661,509 visitors to the previous year's Alexander McQueen retrospective, is likely to have been tempted by punk's potential for mass appeal. Sam Gainsbury, creative director of the McQueen show, has been brought back as design consultant for the punk exhibition. "It's an exciting show, because these [punks] are my style heroes. What I hope is that people who come and see the exhibition will be inspired by how brave and how fearless they were."
The attitudes that punk embodied – anti-establishment, anti-privilege, anti-nostalgia – make this exhibition an intriguing fit for the quiet, cerebral and considered environs of the Met. But the exhibition's organisers point out that while the torn, defaced, DIY aesthetic of punk seems at odds with the couture principles of made-to-measure, the two are in fact linked through their belief in the importance of individuality and originality. "Although punk's democracy stands in opposition to fashion's autocracy, designers continue to appropriate punk's aesthetic vocabulary to capture its youthful rebelliousness and aggressive forcefulness," said Bolton. To give the exhibits maximum impact, Knight and Gainsbury are planning an immersive multimedia experience, in which the clothes will be animated with period music videos and audio soundscapes.
As an intriguing aside, the press conference appeared to add weight to a rising sense in the fashion industry that a rehabilitation of John Galliano is in the offing. A parachute-strapped gown, designed by Galliano for Christian Dior in 2006 which references the aesthetic of Malcolm McLaren 30 years earlier was included in the "teaser" exhibits, and Bolton singled out Galliano as a designer "who profoundly understood the essence of punk".
Paradoxically, the impact of the exhibition may not be a renewal of the spirit of anti-nostalgic innovation that the pioneers of punk stood for. "Of course, we're bound to see a massive resurgence in the punk look itself, because of this exhibition," said Knight.
It's New York fashion week, and there's a lot to hate about it. The crash diets. The extremely skinny, disturbingly young runway models who are held up as "ideal", and all the ways they're exploited. Then there's the extravagant cost of the clothing, where a shopper may drop in one trip what many Americans make in a month.
What's not to hate is the creativity, the art and the women whose shopping sustains the industry.
It's all too satisfying to brand women who like fashion as shallow, self-involved or dumb. And there's certainly a lot to be criticized when it comes to promoting consumption based on a particular brand identity meant to signify wealth – the signature Louis Vuitton bag, the big Chanel Cs. Through the recession, brand identity went slightly more covert in response to an increased hostility to gross displays of wealth, but also as a way to establish a sense of insider-ness. Only the "in crowd" knows the exact shape of a Chloe bag or the signature weave of Bottega Veneta.
Displays of pure consumption to signal social and economic status are not exactly progressive, but it's hypocritical to single out women for being shallow in their wardrobe spending. Men spend money on things that are just as unnecessary and just as intended to signal class and social tribe. For men, items like bespoke suits, fancy cars or innumerable electronics somehow signal a James Bond image, not a shallow one.
While it's a common assumption that women simply have more clothing items in their closets than men, that also reflects social necessity. Women can be (and are) fired for not being attractive enough, for not wearing enough make-up, for being too attractive or for not putting out the right "look". And being attractive isn't just about whether or not your face is pretty; it's about how you signal your social class and your sexual availability.
Women walk this tightrope daily, which is why this fantastic piece of feminist art by Rosea Lakes went so quickly viral. Her piece shows a woman's leg with horizontal lines written on it – lines closer to the ankle are labeled "matronly", "prudish" and "old-fashioned", while lines higher up the thigh segue from "flirty" to "provocative" to "asking for it" to "whore".
Many women, myself included, recognized the inherent silliness in those lines, but also the fact that we have a skirt for every one.
When it comes to fashion, then, women are socially shamed no matter what we do. Don't engage at all? There are entire television series dedicated to making you over, since you clearly lack self-esteem. Do a little shopping but at cheap low-end stores? You look "trashy". Buy pricier items and enjoy it? You're shallow and materialistic.
There are of course some extremely talented women who excel at perusing the aisles of thrift stores and second-hand shops, and who balance loving fashion with a dedication to social justice (no sweatshop labor) and the environment (recycled clothing). My friend Kate Goldwater, the owner of New York's AuH2O boutique, is one of them. But stores like hers aren't nearly as ubiquitous as designer shops, and women who work in places that demand business wear usually can't get away with only rocking vintage and thrifted finds. And unlike men, women can't recycle through the same three high-end suits and be considered "well-dressed".
Women, for better or worse – although mostly worse – are the class of people who are on physical display. Sure, men are judged by their appearance, but as long as they look clean and are wearing an outfit within the universe of what's considered socially appropriate for the occasion, they'll avoid criticism. While being an attractive man is beneficial in the job market, being an attractive woman is beneficial only if you're in a traditionally female career. Otherwise, even pretty women face job discrimination.
There are racial elements to this as well. Some companies, like retailer Abercrombie & Fitch, have reportedly favored hiring employees with "all-American" good looks. Black women have long been told that natural hair or braids aren't "professional" (meaning they should have to spend money and time chemically straightening their hair to fit someone else's aesthetic ideal).
And, of course, the body you're putting into the clothes changes how the outfit is read. A relatively thin, flat-chested woman wearing a v-neck blouse isn't a problem, but bustier women are accused of attention-seeking or looking "inappropriate". A few years ago, conservative bloggers went wild over a photo of Bill Clinton and several liberal writers, because Jessica Valenti, the founder of Feministing.com and one of the bloggers in the photo, was wearing a crew-neck sweater, under which were two breasts. For women who are big-busted, sometimes a turtleneck isn't even enough coverage to be considered "professional".
Of course a lot of us have closets full of clothes to make sure we can meet these ever-shifting demands, and the many requirements of varying social and professional settings.
Fashion is also fun, at least for some of us. While I'm the first person to object to the social expectation that women be visually pleasing creatures, as long as I'm in that jail, I'm gonna take joy where I can get it.
Aesthetics aren't the enemy of feminism; social codes that require women to meet certain aesthetic principles, and to be constantly putting in time, effort and money in the service of femininity, are the enemy. Fight the system, not the people who do their best to operate in it, or, God forbid, take a little pleasure where they can find it. Gendered fashion requirements are bad. Enjoying the self-expression and aesthetic appeal of clothing? Girl, go ahead and enjoy your new shoes.
That's the central issue though, isn't it? That fashion is a thing girls enjoy, and so therefore it must be silly and stupid. There's nothing that makes an afternoon of shopping any sillier than an afternoon watching football; there's nothing inherently less useful about a handbag than a new video game. But because fashion and clothes are stereotypically feminine pursuits and sports are stereotypically masculine, fashion is frivolous and sports are awesome. Women who spend money on themselves are self-involved. Men who do are either dapper or early adapters of the gadget du jour or just "that guy with the boat".
Men, in fact, spend more money on consumer products than women. They spend $11 a day more on average, and they're less likely to be the kind of smart shopper who compares prices and returns items they don't like. But men aren't considered frivolous spenders, because the connotations of the very word "frivolity" are feminine.
Men are also the ones enjoying the lion's share of the money and the fame for women's "shallow" interest in fashion. They outnumber female designers and they get more recognition. The New York Times noted in 2005 that The Council of Fashion Designers of America had given its prestigious annual award to young talent to 29 men and eight women. While male designers have taken home the Womenswear Award 13 out of 18 years, a woman has never won the CDFA Menswear award.
The system that keeps women out of top tier positions, even in industries that largely cater to and are supported by women, is worthy of condemnation. And I won't argue with critics of mindless consumerism. But for all of its faults, the fashion industry creates wearable art, and its designers display laudable ingenuity, creativity and commitment to aesthetic pleasure.
So I hope Fashion Week naysayers were also turning their noses up at last weekend's money-drenched Superbowl, even the best fashion shows don't cost $126,666 per second or $4m a spot like Superbowl ads. And for everything you can say about fashion being a mindless endeavor, at least it doesn't require its players to literally destroy their brains in order to succeed.
She is probably one of the most influential women in fashion retailing that you have never heard of. And unlike some industry types, wrapped up in the crazy world of champagne-swilling, shoulder-rubbing and back-slapping, Kim Winser seems to prefer it that way.
The 53-year-old former commercial director of Marks & Spencer, boss of Aquascutum and chairman of Agent Provocateur, is almost nervous about putting her name to her new clothing business, despite her deep conviction that Winser London will be a worldwide brand in just a few years.
"To use my name is such a big decision, but it's such a good name, or so people tell me," Winser laughs. "It has a nice twist in that it doesn't have the same spelling as our lovely royal family."
That would be the royal family that presented her with an OBE in 2006 for services to the fashion industry, where she has worked since 1977, after joining Marks & Spencer's management trainee scheme.
She raced up the corporate ladder to become Marks's first female – and youngest ever – commercial director, moving on to become menswear executive and then attaining the holy grail of retail – director of womenswear.
However smooth it looked, she says, it certainly wasn't straightforward to get into what had been a male-dominated part of the fashion industry – the commercial, or merchandising side.
"I was rejected two or three times because they said, 'But you're not male.' I said, 'I had noticed, but I want to be in the commercial side of the business', only to be told 'no female goes into that'.
"I wanted it because I thought I'd be good at it, rather than because I would be the first woman to do it. So, it was never about breaking rules or getting badges, it was because I knew that that would be where I would flourish."
The straight-talking and sometimes self-deprecating businesswoman is keen to point out that she doesn't know it all. Her secret to success, she says, is surrounding herself with people who are the very best in their area of expertise.
"I think the best thing is to recruit people who are better than you, then you've got experts in every field in your team.
"Unfortunately, I see sometimes that CEOs and chairmen whom I don't admire want to recruit people who are weaker than them because they are a bit frightened about people being too good, and are unable to admit they might have some weaknesses – which is bizarre because we can't all be perfect at everything."
She adds: "There are still a lot of companies that are stuck in a period where everything is very bureaucratic, which is a great shame because the young talent kicking around in the business don't get their say."
And this philosophy is at the heart of her latest business, an online-only venture selling high-quality women's clothing at affordable prices, where she is employing 25 people ranging from senior and experienced retailers to rookie fashion graduates.
She believes now is the perfect time to launch an internet business focusing on quality, because the price competition elsewhere in the industry has become so intense that shoppers are no longer surprised if their cherished garments start to fall apart not long after arriving in their wardrobes.
"We're in the Primark generation, where people want three items for the price of one. It's shocking how much the quality of clothing has deteriorated since I was at Marks and Spencer.
"But I think we're coming full circle, to a point where women want to buy one really nice piece instead of three. I think there's something really distasteful about buying clothes you know you're going to throw away within a year."
Winser hopes to use her vast contacts book to connect directly with manufacturers around the world.
"Look at this," she says, pointing to the knitted sweater she's wearing in her hotel suite in the heart of Mayfair. "If you find something similar around here for under £500 you'll be doing well. On my website, it's just £200."
So certain is she about the website's success that discussions about worldwide expansion in around three years' time are already under way with her Middle Eastern backers – whose identity she declines to reveal.
And Winser has good reason to feel confident: after all, she managed to turn Pringle of Scotland from what she calls, "a discounted men's golf clothes business", into a successful fashion house attracting customers including David Beckham, Robbie Williams, Guy Richie and Madonna.
Then, in 2006, she became boss of Aquascutum, again turning the business around and attempting a management buyout, before quitting when it became apparent the Japanese owners intended to split up the company and sell it.
It sounds as though that experience still rankles. "I didn't have a back-up plan at that point because I was totally and utterly dedicated to Aquascutum."
However, within days of her departure being announced, online retailer Net-a-Porter signed her as an adviser, and private equity firm 3i requested her services.
While working advising family investment funds stretching from Brazil to the Middle East, she set about searching for a retail brand to snap up and call her own. But it soon became apparent that businesses were either overburdened with debt, stuck with landlords unwilling to lower their rent, or treating their online business like an unwanted appendage. "I then decided to approach my investors with the idea for winserlondon.com, which they agreed to fund."
Insisting that this is a long-term project, she says: "I would have gone with private equity if I wanted to build and sell something within three years, not caring if it went under; I want to build something that lasts."
But while she hopes her own brand will last for generations, she fears for the future of other fashion retailers operating in today's tough environment.
The downturn has already swallowed up the likes of Peacocks, La Senza and her former company, Aquascutum, in the past 12 months. All have fallen into administration, although the latter was later saved.
She says: "I think business was easier up until the past five years. You could have really good people and you could have average people, but because there was so much money out there, lots of companies that should have been in more difficulty weren't.
"I think what's happening now is you have to be better than average, and those who aren't are struggling and falling into administration. You can't be just average any more. That, in a way, is quite exciting because it's making people work harder, and I think there are going to be some brands that develop well."
So if everything is harder, why try launching a company now? "I remember Warren Buffett said, 'I quite often do what people don't expect me to do, so I buy when everybody else is selling and sell when everyone else is buying'."
As soon as Winser starts quoting the legendary US investor she stops herself. "Don't put me down as quoting Warren Buffett. I don't want to be seen as comparing myself to him, because I'm not, but I do share his sentiment."
With the same self-deprecating charm, she asks as she finishes posing for the Observer's photographer: "Would you rather not use pictures of Yasmin Le Bon instead of me?"
But if, as she hopes, Winser London becomes a major worldwide fashion brand, she may have to get used to all this extra attention.
A satin stiletto with mini disco balls inserted into the platform. Glossy patent mint pumps with contrast squat heel and toe detail in acid yellow. Peep-toe sandal-boots with turquoise heel and a cut-out snakeskin section that laces up the leg. These elaborate descriptions are the work of shoe visionary Nicholas Kirkwood, the latest British based designer to be awarded the BFC/Vogue fashion fund prize.
Joining the ranks of previous winners Erdem, Christopher Kane and Jonathan Saunders, Kirkwood, who also snagged the accessory designer prize at the 2012 British fashion awards, has been awarded £200,00 to further develop his business. The prize includes access to key industry mentors from across the fashion industry.
British Vogue editor Alexandra Shulman said she was delighted with the decision. "Nicholas has created a real business in an impressively short amount of time and has become one of the world's most influential shoe designers," she said. "I very much look forward to seeing what he does next."
BFC chief executive Caroline Rush noted that Kirkwood's application "provided a clear and compelling case for how both funding and targeted mentoring would be used to assist him in taking the next steps in developing a global brand."
The other designers shortlisted for this year's prize were Roksanda Ilincic, Mary Katrantzou, Peter Pilotto and Emilia Wickstead.
Famed for creating shoe designs with sculptural glamour and punchy colour and texture combinations, Kirkwood's shoes have been frequently red-carpeted with recent fans including Nicole Kidman, Jennifer Lawrence and Beyoncé. Kirkwood also creates catwalk shoes for Peter Pilotto and Erdem – for spring/summer that means patterned booties or stonking metallic sandals respectively.
Jess Cartner-Morley, the Guardian's fashion editor is a fan. "Nicholas Kirkwood shoes are the kind you fall in love with. They're the shoes you spot across a crowded shop floor and dream about on the bus home," she says.
Kirkwood, 32, trained at Central Saint Martins and Cordwainers before working with milliner Philip Treacy and launching his eponymous label in 2005. Eight years later, Kirkwood and business partner Christopher Suarez have successfully opened two flagship stores – one in London's Mayfair, the other in the Meatpacking District of New York. A debut menswear collection was shown in London in January, and will go on sale this autumn.
Cartner-Morley also reveals that the one new season trophy buy she wanted to wear at the next round of catwalk shows, starting in February, were a pair of Kirkwoods. "They are blue snakeskin pumps with a shiny, square heel in red and yellow, just 2in high, that look like blocks of the extra-chunky Lego they make for toddlers. They are sort of psychedelic nan shoes. The low heel doesn't just make them wearable – it makes them eminently more interesting and modern than the proliferation of uber-heels."
For many in the public eye, a drunken outburst like that made by the fashion designer John Galliano in December 2010 would have been a terminal blow to reputation and career. "I love Hitler," he told two Jewish Italian women sitting at a neighbouring table in a Paris bar. "People like you would be dead today. Your mothers, your forefathers would be fucking dead, fucking gassed."
The comments, which were filmed and circulated online, led to abrupt disgrace. He was fired as creative director of Christian Dior and would go on to be prosecuted over the outburst and other racist comments; France stripped him of the Légion D'Honneur it awarded him in 2009.
But there are crimes against fashion and crimes against the fashion world, and when it comes to the latter, it seems, no misdemeanour is absolutely unforgiveable. On Friday it emerged that the 52-year-old Briton is to make a tentative return to the fashion establishment, undertaking a temporary residency at the studio of Oscar de la Renta in New York.
"I am grateful to Oscar beyond words for inviting me to spend time with him in the fam iliar surroundings of a design studio," the shamed designer said of the short-term placement. "His support and faith in me is humbling.'
De la Renta added: "John and I have known each other for many years and I am a great admirer of his talent. He has worked long and hard on his recovery and I am happy to give him the opportunity to reimmerse himself in the world of fashion and reacclimate in an environment where he has been so creative."
The arrangement was brokered by Anna Wintour, the powerful editor of US Vogue, it was reported, who is a friend of both designers and is said to have first suggested the residency.
Galliano, who was born in Gibraltar and grew up in south London, has not been without supporters during his exile – Kate Moss, a longtime friend, pointedly chose him to design her wedding dress. The influential US stylist Patricia Field said his remarks were no more than "theatre", and sent out emails headed "In praise of John Galliano". Sir Philip Green was even reported to be trying to coax him into designing a collection for TopShop.
Galliano himself dismissed those rumours, saying his "only focus for the foreseeable future was concentrating on his rehab". The designer had blamed his behaviour on a catastrophic alcohol addiction, saying his racist insults were "not views I hold or believe in. In the video I see someone who needs help".
In comments to Women's Wear Daily, Galliano said: "I am an alcoholic. I have been in recovery for the past two years. Several years prior to my sobriety, I descended into the madness of the disease. I said and did things which hurt others, especially members of the Jewish community. I have expressed my sorrow privately and publicly for the pain which I caused, and I continue to do so. I remain committed to making amends to those I have hurt."
While Galliano's contrition will inevitably provoke some cynicism, the US-based Anti-Defamation League, which campaigns against antisemitism, told Vogue, which first reported the story, that it was content the designer had learned from his disgrace. "We believe that individuals can change their hearts and minds as long as they demonstrate true contrition," said Abraham Foxman, ADL's national director.
"Mr Galliano has worked arduously in changing his world view and dedicated a significant amount of time to researching, reading and learning about the evils of antisemitism and bigotry. Along his journey to recovery he met with us on numerous occasions. He has accepted full responsibility for his previous remarks and understands that hurtful comments have no place in our society."
As for the fashion establishment, Alexandra Shulman, the editor of British Vogue said most people would be "entirely enthusiastic" about Galliano's return. "Certainly the people I have spoken to are delighted to hear that he has been given a new opportunity," she said. "John Galliano has a very particular take on fashion that is nostalgic and luxurious and very beautiful. I think it is the beauty of his work that is a huge part of his appeal. It is often not the most commercial sensibility but it is extremely individual and desirable and I imagine will merge well with Oscar's aesthetic."
It would be "helpful" for the designer to make a small-scale return with the support of someone of the stature of Oscar de la Renta, she said, but with the placement initially due to last only three weeks, Galliano's rehabilitation as a force in fashion has some way to go yet.
In 2006, the UK charity War on Want commissioned Khorshed Alam, who has died, aged 46, of septicaemia, to undertake research in Bangladesh on workers producing clothes for Primark, Tesco and Asda. His report on their poverty wages and sweatshop conditions brought huge public attention.
Six months on, Khorshed addressed shareholders at Tesco's annual meeting to support a resolution from the charity's secretary, Ben Birnberg, demanding fair treatment for Tesco's garment factory workers. The Guardian followed up Khorshed's original study to expose these workers' continued exploitation in a report that went on to win the 2008 press section prize in the One World Media Awards. Before the end of that year, Khorshed's further research on the same factories had revealed workers were still abused. Last March, an Observer article based on a study by Khorshed exposed exploitation of workers by the Olympic sponsor Adidas.
Khorshed's studies helped to win garment workers rights to maternity and paid leave, as well as rises in the national minimum wage. In addition, he conducted research for another UK group, Labour Behind the Label, and two international organisations, the Clean Clothes Campaign alliance and the Fair Wear Foundation.
He was born into a farmer's family, the youngest of six children, in the village of Amzadhat. Khorshed was educated at the local Dharmapur educational institute and Nizampur college. Later, he gained bachelor's and master's degrees from Dhaka University, as well as qualifications through German and Dutch education institutions.
From 1991, he was employed in Dhaka, the capital, by the organisation Ubinig (Unnayan Bikalper Nitinirdharoni Gobeshona, or Policy Research for Development Alternatives). Khorshed was research associate and assistant coordinator of its trade union education centre, Srama Bikash Kendra, supporting garment workers battling for labour rights. In 1994, he was appointed coordinator for another Dhaka-based organisation, Unnayan Shaojogy Team, helping the rural poor, especially women and children, on ecological agriculture, development and water.
In 2001, he became a policy and management research fellow at Delft technical university in the Netherlands, and 2002 saw him return to his native country as executive director of the Alternative Movement for Resources and Freedom Society. Five years later, War on Want asked him to provide reports on UK-linked overseas sweatshops.
Khorshed showed great courage and commitment in a country where many rights campaigners face state repression. He once said: "Fighting against inequality is a hard path. I have taken this hard path, consciously, and will follow this path till the last day of my life." In my work as media officer for War on Want, I found Khorshed's expertise invaluable in securing vital British support for workers demanding a living wage.
Khorshed is survived by his brother Obaidul and three sisters, Samsun, Rezia and Khohinur.
French Connection has warned it will plunge into the red by up to £8m this year after a decision to delay its winter sale tore into profits.
The retailer, which was criticised last year for maintaining an average garment price tag of about £100 at a time when customers were cutting their spending, put off its sale period by a week as part of a process to "build brand equity", the company said in a trading statement on Wednesday.
But the strategy backfired, with shoppers drawn to cheaper fashion at Top Shop, Zara and online store Asos. French Connection's like-for-like sales in the UK and Europe slumped by nearly 3% in the six months to 12 January, and the shares fell 8% to 27.25p. Less than a year ago they were changing hands at 121p.
Nearly 2% of lost revenues were blamed on the change of sale date, and the group as a whole, which also owns the Toast and Great Plains brands, now expects a loss of between £7.5 and £8m for the full year, having dipped £6.3m into the red in the first half.
French Connection made a pre-tax profit of £5m in its previous financial year, and 2013 will mark its first loss since 2009. Major restructuring including the closure of stores in Japan and the US and the sale of its upmarket Nicole Farhi label helped to keep the chain afloat, but the benefits appear to have been short lived.
Celebrity jeweller Theo Fennell has issued a profits warning as demand for its jewel-encrusted skulls with five-figure price tags faded during a "disappointing" Christmas.
The company, favoured by Elton John and Cheryl Cole, is in takeover talks and on Friday delayed the put-up or shut-up deadline for the fourth time, until 22 February. It emerged in September that the group was in preliminary discussions with the private equity group EME Capital, sending the shares up by more than 50% to 15p. But as negotiations dragged on share prices have dropped back and after the profits warning fell a further 17% to 9.5p.
In December the company said losses had more than halved in the first six months of the year, in line with expectations. But on Friday it said results for the year to March would be "materially below" management expectations.
"The company experienced a disappointing Christmas trading period due to a challenging UK consumer market, an uncertain economic environment and a lack of footfall to the stores," it said. Cost savings achieved by the group would help mitigate losses for the full year, it added.
The latest forecasts from house broker Seymour Pierce suggested Theo Fennell would make losses before tax of £400,000 from sales of £13m this year, but they were withdrawn when the company entered takeover talks.
The news comes a day after luxury jeweller Tiffany said Christmas sales were lower than expected, hit by economic uncertainty in the US and Europe.
The Christmas trading period has proved to be mixed with supermarket giants Tesco and J Sainsbury arguing which of them had the most stellar performance during the festive season and Marks & Spencer being forced to issue its trading statement early after a leak of its disappointing sales.
John Lewis has boasted strong sales over Christmas and its latest update, published on Friday, showed sales up 21% in the week to 5 January. "The first full week of [the] clearance [sale] continued the momentum gathered over the festive period," it said.
It is difficult to know for certain that the clothes you wear are not tainted by slavery (Lucy Mangan: how many slaves work for you?, 5 January). Most of the cotton exported from Uzbekistan, mentioned in the article, ends up in Europe and we – often unknowingly – are complicit in forced labour simply by buying a T-shirt. Exceptionally, the practice of state-sponsored forced labour in Uzbekistan means that we are calling on retailers to avoid the use of Uzbek cotton. However, in the majority of situations we would strongly urge consumers not to boycott certain goods or brands as it can hurt those in slavery-like conditions. Instead, consumers can play an important role in ending modern-day slavery by putting pressure on governments to make sure laws are in place and enforced to protect vulnerable people, and on business to make sure forced labour is not present in their supply chains.
Learning from the experience – not least from ending the transatlantic slave trade – we at Anti-Slavery International believe in the power of public pressure. www.antislavery.org/cottoncrimes.
Joanna Ewart-James
Supply chain programme co-ordinator, Anti-Slavery International
"What's a pretty girl like you doing dressed in rags?"
People are always saying things like that to Grace Coddington. (She was once walking in the Kings Road in her shorts and lime-green tights and clogs when an American tourist stopped her, walked slowly round, staring, and said: "You've just got to be joking.") These are the penalties of being fashionably dressed at the moment. Grace Coddington is a fashion editor on Vogue and generally considered by people who admire the kind of clothes she wears to be impeccably "together". They look forward to seeing what she's got on – hot rumour had it last summer that she had been seen carrying a butterfly net as an accessory, but it wasn't true. (Though she does have a kind of Dick Whittington hankie bag that can be tied to a stick.) Grace is mad about clothes and spends a lot on them. Back in Wales before she could afford to buy them, she used to make them all herself. "They were incredible – I would love to have them now, things like pencil skirts and dresses with great shoulder pads."
These days all her clothes are bits and pieces and she find them in antique markets and jumble sales, in Indian shops and children's shops, and in France. She gets passions for things. Last year she wore hats or scarves every single day for months – "Until just before Christmas no one had seen my hair for over a year." (When she finally took off her headgear people were quite shocked – "like looking at a nun or something," said a colleague.)
Grace is chic but not particularly sexy looking. "I would love to be sexily dressed," she says, "but not at the cost of looking like what I think sexy dressing is. I hate to change in the evening. I re-do my makeup, but I like to wear what I've worn all day."
Her outfits look complicated (layer over layer, sweaters on top of sweaters etc), but she swears she doesn't rehearse in them – she simply has an eye for what will look right with what. "I love clothes at the moment because there's no one style." Didn't she think that this makes life awfully confusing for those without her instinct? "There's no excuse," she said emphatically. "Look, I'm 29 and I take a size 12 or even 14 sometimes. You just need to stop thinking that everyone's going to say, 'God, how terrible she looks in that long skirt', and just do it. If I didn't have a clue, I'd read magazines – especially the French ones. The girls always look right."
Grace is not sure yet what she'll be wearing in the spring. "So far I like smocks a lot and this powder-blue colour that's being promoted. I don't know about shorts – I might be over them since I've been wearing them for ages already."
Next month, the fashion world begins its bi-annual merry-go-round of fashion shows. This time around, designers and brands in New York, London, Milan and Paris will be showing collections for autumn/winter 2013. That might, in most people's minds, denote the colours of falling leaves, coats, opaque tights, hats and gloves ... what we wear when the weather changes, right? Wrong. In recent years, winter collections have included exotic hothouse flowers and miniskirts with bare legs and sunglasses, while the most recent round of summer shows featured layering, coats and a whole lot of very winter-worthy black.
This isn't just designers getting confused – instead, it's part of a bigger trend towards a sort of seasonless style. In a world where we spend time in artificially cold or warm environments thanks to air conditioning and central heating, the demarcations between the seasons are not as clear as they once were. Add the wash-out summers and warmer winters created by climate change, plus the growing global market for high fashion, and the blurring makes even more sense. It may be around 7C in London, but in Mumbai it's 34C and humid.
This is a problem at the heart of fashion right now – Vogue ran a three-page article addressing the problem in a recent issue and designers are getting involved in the debate. "The problem at the moment is that you look at a winter show and you want to see warm clothes," says Jonathan Saunders. "In actual fact, in the whole other half of the hemisphere, it's warm, and you deliver in July."
To an increasingly show-literate audience of shoppers who have style.com in their bookmarks bar and get access to behind-the-scenes snaps from fashion insiders on Instagram, the collection in store starts to look a bit stale earlier than it used to. We have all seen the new range on the runway – even if we can't buy it yet. In a world where you can get a movie instantly, or download a song in seconds, our patience for waiting for season-led content is wearing thin.
While Saunders believes that eventually the industry will have to change to accommodate this new demand, a stopgap has been the rise of pre-collections – resort and pre-fall. Originally designed for wealthy customers jetting off for warmer climes in the winter – hence the name resort – these collections are designed to come into shops in November (resort) and May (pre-fall).
"Pre-collections have probably been more visible for about the past five years," says Susannah Frankel, fashion director of Grazia. "The rise of fast fashion partly explains that – people know a lot more about fashion now than they used to and they want to see new things more often."
Generally more commercial than catwalk pieces, pre-collections are increasingly bringing in a greater total revenue than the autumn/winter and spring/summer shows. A lot of stores are spending 70% of their budget on these collections in order to ensure the shop floor is topped up with new pieces all the time: pieces that can be worn throughout the year.
So could this spell the end of the seasonal fashion show? Probably not – but its function will evolve. Instead of selling clothes, the catwalk is now about exposure. "The show is about the brand image and the pre-collections are about keeping that momentum," says Ruth Chapman, founder of London boutique Matches. "These pieces need to be transseasonal. Our online business is 50% international and the climates where people live obviously make a big difference."
While Chapman argues that it must be liberating for a designer to create collections without concessions to temperatures – "there's always somewhere you can wear whatever it is so you're home and dry" – it's not without its challenges.
Jennifer Baca, managing director of British label Erdem – one of the first independent London labels to add pre-collections to their brand – says it has been a learning curve. "We have to service the customer in the Middle East, Florida, Russia – everywhere," she says. "It's mind-boggling." When these clothes go into store is also an issue. "These clothes are going to be on the floor for a long time," she says. "We ship resort in October, it's in store from November to May. When the main collection hits the store in January, it gives clients a breath of newness."
In another topsy-turvy move, high-fashion brands have started to take note of fast-fashion retailers such as Zara – where deliveries are small and often, with stock delivered twice a week, for instant-access fashion. The influence is starting to show itself. Saunders collaborated with website Motilo for pieces that could be ordered from the runway and delivered straight after the September show, and Burberry's Runway to Reality idea sees pieces in your wardrobe eight weeks – rather than three months – later. Brands including Stella McCartney and Acne have started adding another, smaller collection for high summer, dropping into store in April, and taking the total number of collections a year up to five. For those fashion editors about to embark on their trip to New York in February, it adds up to a lot of questions – including, of course, the most important one of all: what to wear on the front row? When a new season is always just out of reach, being ahead of the game is no longer easy.
Personally, I'm amazed that 10-year-old Romeo Beckham's appearance in the new Burberry ads has caused so much fuss. What did people think he was going to be? A plumber, perhaps? A dustman? Or, even worse (and even more unlikely, with his parentage), a journalist? No doubt a lot of readers, particularly parents, will criticise the Beckhams for allowing their son to feature in such a high-profile campaign at such a tender age. But to my mind, their passion for fashion is so all consuming that David and Victoria should be congratulated on waiting so long.
You can hear Victoria now: "No, David! Not until he reaches double figures. Then we'll launch him as a global superstar." At least fashion is something they both take an interest in, which is putting it mildly. Every week thousands of young kids play for the school football team or appear in the school play, or ballet, looking in vain to see whether their parents have turned up to watch them. At least Romeo knows that if (or, rather, when) he appears on his first catwalk, Posh and Becks will be there – in the front row.
Has there been a fuss? I hadn't noticed. On Mumsnet, the great barometer of maternal opinion, there's been no outcry. One mum says he looks gorgeous and another that he looks like his dad, which some would say is the same thing. So allow me to come up with some tight-lipped objections. This isn't really about Romeo modelling Burberry clothes that only parents with more money than sense would buy. It isn't even about what he's going to be when he grows up – although if it was about his future career then some of us would prefer he follow his dad's footsteps and become a footballer (England's not short of simpering male models but we could do with someone who can put a free kick into the top right-hand corner when we need to get into the World Cup finals). I'm not saying it's a heinous crime to put your child on the catwalk but it's not the most enriching thing for your child to do. There's no inherent skill involved in a child modelling, unless being placid, biddable, thin and able to smile at strangers are "qualities" worth celebrating.
Suppose we move away from the glamour of the Beckhams to the aspirations of more ordinary parents: how do we feel about children missing school to attend a casting call for some kids' clothes catalogue?
JS You're definitely right that there's something more heinous about "ordinary" parents encouraging/forcing their kids into modelling than the Beckhams doing it. It's usually pushy parents seeing dollar signs when they watched their first episode of Outnumbered – smug mums who are convinced their little darlings are more gorgeous than everyone else's. At least no one can argue Romeo is living out his parents' sad, unfulfilled fame fantasies. The Beckhams are surprisingly well adjusted, so there's no reason why Romeo couldn't combine some kind of career in fashion with a good education. Lily Cole got a double first at Cambridge.
I disagree that there's "no skill involved in modelling" and that it is inherently negative. Surely such a rich experience can only be a good thing for any kid? There's an unpleasant stigma about models in this country. I don't see why being a footballer would elevate Romeo more than a model. We've got enough greedy, dumb divas in football and no male model superstars. The models I've known are surprisingly well read. They're very knowledgable about diet (sticking mostly to Haribos and champagne) and they seem to know how to have a good time. And, working for Burberry, Romeo won't go short of raincoats.
LD Is that a rich experience as in lucrative? Not many children get rich from modelling. Parents used to be able to say that modelling fees enabled their children to pay their way through university but that was before fees rose to £9,000 a year. Still, there may be many well-educated models – you can be beautiful and smart and want to be a highly-skilled clothes horse all day. But we're talking about kids modelling, and I've no idea how many slip happily into successful adult careers and get Oxbridge firsts. So, for kids, how enriching is modelling? There's the excitement of getting to a casting 100 miles away by the next morning and telling the school you've got a dental appointment. The endless waiting around with your pushy, anxious mums, only to be rejected because they didn't want your look, darling. No, no, it's nothing personal. And if you get the job, even more waiting around to do the same thing over and over again. You can get to wear winter coats under hot lights in July. If you're really, really lucky.
JS I don't understand the public antipathy towards models – even the high-profile, highly strung madams like Naomi Campbell. Modelling is incredibly hard, thankless work and as valid as any other profession. Some of the world's best photographers (Bailey, Helmut Newton, Bruce Weber) could not have produced their most beautiful photos without models.
Any work a child does at an early age is an experience, and at least modelling is exciting. Surely it's better than your son or daughter wanting to be an accountant? Someone's got to model children's clothes. What's the alternative? Plain coat-hangers? Adult models kneeling down? Rejection is hardly confined to modelling: any freelance journalist will tell you that. You say you'd prefer Romeo to become a footballer but every year thousands of talented British kids fail to make it to even the lowest level of professional football, after years of training and missing school.
I can see why the Beckhams are happy doing this… it might come in handy if they hit upon hard times.
LD It's less about the models – it's more about the unappealing nature of the business, especially for a child. Yes, perhaps you need child models to show off kiddie clothes; but before the sight of Romeo in a Burberry raincoat turns the heads of parents, you're right to remind people that modelling is incredibly hard, thankless work. I'm rather fond of my accountant but, yes, I'd be surprised if my 11-year-old daughter said she wanted to be one. By that age every child has got the message that all that matters is self-promotion and celebrity. But if she became an accountant I'd worry less about her developing eating disorders and meeting predatory men.
Yes, rejection is part of life. But putting your child up for rejection based solely on their looks has little to recommend it. If your daughter doesn't get into the netball team she can practise her goal shooting. I guess the modelling equivalent is adding highlights to her hair.
There's more in it for the parents than the kids. If you really did need grown-ups to kneel to model children's clothes, these parents would probably do it.
While today's fashion revolution is being led by the street photography of the style blogger, back in the 1960s the seeds were already being sewn as a new generation of photographers came to the fore in London just as skirt hems were being chopped off, and youth celebrated.
Three talents led the movement – David Bailey, Brian Duffy and Terence Donovan. They were all working class and brought the reality and nuances of contemporary life to their photography, knocking down the ivory tower – all couture ball gowns, aristocratic-looking models and ladylike manners – that had dominated fashion to date.
While David Bailey is still alive and highly active in his profession today (and has published many books), Terence Donovan died in 1996, leaving a huge archive of work to his widow, Diana, who has compiled this hefty monograph with art director David Hillman.
Just when you thought there could not possibly be space for another fashion book rooted in the 1960s, this one proves rather compelling. It makes you question and appreciate the craft of good fashion photography and indeed good fashion. On a simplistic note, Donovan was a "good" fashion photographer because he unfailingly managed to show off the fashion in a clear and crisp manner – his professionalism pleased Vogue editors for many years. "With Terry, one would spend one's day laughing until your sides ached. But he always had such great command of the situation, no fussing about, always so direct," writes Grace Coddington, then a fashion editor at British Vogue, in her foreword.
But Donovan is also a "great" because he managed to capture the nuance and gesture of the time, bringing the energy of the London street (many shoots were on location), the naturalistic stance and "real moment" into the frame. It was a different universe from the mannered expressions and stances of the gentleman society photographers, such as Cecil Beaton, of the previous era: "Terence's approach to photography was so different, often breaking the 'expected rules' of fashion photography with lots on unusual angles, dramatic lighting and often a grainy quality to the photographs. It really was a totally new take on photography for its time," as Sir Paul Smith put it.The heavy paper and high quality reproduction rewards the viewer. In a 1965 shoot for Elle, a gamine model in graphic patterned suit by Dior, leather gloves and fedora is caught in a dramatic arc of light against a mosaic wall. The model appears defiant, punching the air, glaring at the lens and delivering what is now known as "attitude", but back then would have appeared threatening, radical. For Tatler there is the 1962 portrait of Jean Shrimpton in a wedding dress, sitting on a chair and looking forlorn, broken. The image skewed the promise of happy-ever-after bliss at a time of social upheaval.
It was in his menswear shoots that Donovan was really able to express his dark-humoured, sardonic view of life. An elegant, suited-and-booted male model and scowling schoolboy appear outside a modernist church in Bow Common bearing the inscription "This is the Gate of Heaven". Donovan's locations – pedestrian subways, industrial backdrops, East End streets – are fascinating in their own right.
The book, frustratingly, reveals little about the man – anecdotes are garnered from industry professionals rather than personal friends. But what you do appreciate in Robin Muir's sensitive text is context – the changing role of fashion, the role of media and how photographers collaborated with editors and art directors. Spreads from Man About Town and the Sunday Times magazine – bold graphics, dramatic framing, photo-reportage style, witty captions – are enthralling. In one taken from Man About Town, a model in a peacoat and tie is shot against the dark industrial landscape of the Midlands. The headline? "Man about the Black Country". These shoots presage so much of what was to come with the revolution of the style press of the 1990s. The Face and i-D photographers took on the baton, moulding themselves as ciphers of contemporary culture, further blurring the boundaries of photo-reportage, portraiture and fashion.
Donovan, who was born in the East End to a lorry-driver father, and trained at Bethnal Green Camera Club before apprenticing at photographer John French's studio, was apparently a larger-than-life character. Big in physical form, with piercing blue eyes and tremendous drive. "Fame," he told one interviewer, "is suspect, dangerous material, all right for going through airports and things like that, but it's not something to pay too much attention to. Life is ephemeral and quick. I'll just play the show until the curtain comes down."
He stuck to his words, mastering his craft (he was technically brilliant) and enjoying the fruits of his labour: a Rolls-Royce, a Piccadilly home, his wife Diana and children, and now a handsome posthumous monograph to boot.
One of Britain's most popular fashion chains is under pressure to sever its links with clothing suppliers that buy cotton from Uzbekistan, where large quantities are harvested using child labour.
H&M, the giant fashion chain which uses football star David Beckham and singer Lana Del Rey in its advertising campaigns, has signed a pledge to "not knowingly" source cotton from the central Asian country in response to concern from human rights groups.
Uzbekistan, one of the world's largest exporters of cotton, forces adults and children as young as nine to pick cotton under what the charity Anti-Slavery International describes as "appalling conditions". However, it is difficult to trace Uzbek cotton back to its source. Much of it ends up in Bangladesh and China. As a result, many fashion chains cannot guarantee that their clothing is free of Uzbek cotton.
H&M, which has almost 200 UK stores and 2,500 worldwide, is now one of several high street names that will be targeted by Anti-Slavery International's cotton campaign, which calls on well-known brands to stop buying clothing from suppliers that source cotton from Uzbekistan. "Unless H&M implements the practical steps set out by the cotton campaign, it is near impossible for us to be confident that H&M's goods are truly free from state-sponsored forced labour," a spokeswoman for the charity said. "By implementing these steps, we can be confident that H&M is doing everything it can to support an end to the use of forced labour."
It is believed that the Uzbekistan government increased the scale of forced labour for this year's harvest, which was worth an estimated $1bn (£619m). Schoolchildren and their teachers, doctors and nurses and many other public sector employees were forced to work in the cotton fields or face fines, the loss of wages or denial of college places. International monitors were banned from observing the harvest.
Human rights groups said students were beaten by public authorities for failing to meet their quotas. In Angren district, parents were told that if they wanted to exempt their children from the harvest they would either have to pay a $110 fee or withdraw their children's application to high school. All government employees are eligible to be sent to pick cotton. A refusal can mean the loss of a job, pay or benefits.
An H&M spokeswoman said it had a policy of prohibiting the use of Uzbek cotton in its products, which is communicated to all suppliers. "While our systems continue to evolve, we aim for all cotton to come from more sustainable, fully traceable sources by 2020 at the latest."
Ikea has been subjected to similar scrutiny from human rights groups. "We do all we can to ensure that Uzbek cotton is not used in our products, but the traceability process for the cotton industry is not robust," said Josefin Thorell, an Ikea spokeswoman. "In the case of, for example, Bangladesh, where much of the cotton used in manufacturing is traditionally from Uzbekistan, Ikea suppliers are required to buy from India."
Concerns about the use of Uzbek cotton have led to questions being asked of Peter Lilley, the former Tory trade secretary who heads the Uzbek-British Trade and Industry Council, which promotes the Uzbek Cotton and Textile Fair. Anti-Slavery International questioned whether the council was in breach of UN and Foreign Office human rights guidelines. In an emailed reply, Lilley said the council followed Foreign Office guidelines and its main role was "to broaden trade and investment between the UK and Uzbekistan", not promote cotton.
In 2007, a documentary team began filming The September Issue, a behind-the-scenes look at American Vogue as staff put together the magazine's fattest number of the year under the direction of Anna Wintour, its somewhat scary editor. Thanks to The Devil Wears Prada, a novel in which a woman not unlike Wintour is portrayed as a demanding monster by a former assistant, Wintour's fame preceded her; the film-makers must have thought she would be their star. In the end, though, this is not what happened. When the film was released in 2009, it was clear that the camera had loved a different creature, a pale and tetchy redhead called Grace Coddington, who is Vogue's creative director.
Coddington thinks there was far too much of her in the film, and she suspects her boss felt the same way. But it made her, in New York at least, quite famous, and this she likes. At her local nail salon, for instance, where the staff are Korean, they can't get enough of her. "They love me," she writes, in her memoir. "'Glace! Glace!' they shout when I walk in. They used to like sitting me near the window so passersby could see me. Pedestrians often came up to the glass. When they realised I couldn't hear them, they mouthed things at me like, 'I love The September Issue. I love your work.'" Even better, she was asked to write the story of her life – which was surprising, "given that I've rarely read two books in my life that aren't picture books". To help her out with this commission, she enlisted the help of her friend, Michael Roberts, the famously waspish style director of Vanity Fair.
The model for Grace is surely DV by Diana Vreeland, who was editor-in-chief of American Vogue in the 1960s. But where that book was narrated by a woman long retired, and free to say whatever she liked – in DV's opening paragraph, Vreeland merrily describes punching the agent Swifty Lazar on the nose – Coddington is at the heart of the fashion establishment, and must therefore be discreet; one gathers that even now she still dreads losing her job. Anyone hoping to find out what she really thinks about Galliano, Lagerfeld et al is, then, going to be disappointed – unless (terrifying thought) she really does think that everyone in fashion is clever and funny and generally adorable. Names are dropped rather than unpacked; fashion is described not deconstructed. The moments when she is critical – it is, for instance, just a little trying when, at a shoot on her English estate, Madonna refuses to wear a hat that looks like a cream cake – are so wildly rare, they jump out at you like Paris couture on a rail of Primark nylon.
Coddington was born in 1941 on Anglesey, Wales, where her parents ran a hunkered, whitewashed hotel. This is the best bit of the book, for she evokes island life quite beautifully: the cold, the longing for trees, the patterns she used to buy from Polykoff's, an old department store in Holyhead. With nothing much else to do, she took the fantasy world of Vogue to heart, and it was from among its pages that, aged 18, she clipped a tiny paragraph advertising, for the price of 25 guineas, a two-week course at the Cherry Marshall modelling school in Mayfair. "I knew I must leave my tiny island," she writes. Those who stayed had only two choices, career-wise: clock factory or snack bar.
In London, she worked as a waitress at the Stockpot and waited for her ship to come in. Happily, it wasn't long. Soon after graduating from Cherry Marshall, Coddington won a Vogue modelling competition, and was suddenly in demand. She was photographed by Norman Parkinson, had her hair cut by Vidal Sassoon, and was duly awarded a nickname: the Cod. It wasn't as pretty as Jean Shrimpton's, but somehow it stuck. "Cold as a codfish but hot as a four-bar fire" proclaimed a baffling headline in the Daily Sketch. By the time she began work as a stylist at Vogue in 1968, she had kissed Mick Jagger, spilt wine over Catherine Deneuve's white Courrèges dress, and was dating the man who would become her first husband, the restaurateur Michael Chow. (Her second marriage, which lasted six months, was to the photographer Willie Christie; she now lives with her boyfriend of 30 years, the hairdresser Didier Malige.)
It's at this point that all the heat goes out of her book. In life, I admire emotional reticence. But there's really no point in writing a memoir if you're not going to give anything away. It's also disconcerting, to say the least, to find grave events – the car accident in which she lost the only child she was ever able to conceive; the breakdown and early death of her sister, whose son Coddington later adopted – passed over in two cool sentences, when she is willing to devote several pages to her favourite models, and a whole chapter to her cats. Boy, is she keen on cats. Forget shoes. Forget bags. Forget sunglasses. (Actually, she hates sunglasses.) Grace is "cat central". In New York, people are always asking for the number of her cat psychic: "She's brilliant, by the way. I was introduced to her by Bruce Weber."
Coddington hated The Devil Wears Prada: "I thought it made our business look laughable." Alas, she's pretty good at doing this herself – and I don't just mean the cats. In Normandy, she and a makeup artist spend an hour fruitlessly tipping buckets of dye into the sea, the better to make it blue for the photographer David LaChapelle. A visit to communist China in the late 70s leaves her "appreciating minimalism in new ways". Worst of all, noting that Tina Chow, Michael's second wife, died of Aids in 1992, she writes: "I had no idea up until then that it was even possible for women to contract Aids." Such daffyness – I'm being polite – will be familiar to anyone who has ever worked on a fashion magazine (though it's surprising that Roberts, her "lifelong friend", didn't intervene; perhaps he is even more waspish than I thought). But I must admit that I expected better from Coddington. That startling forehead of hers, combined with the fact that she has been in the business for so long, contrived to convince me that she might just be the one to point out which of fashion's various emperors are wearing clothes, and which of them are stark bollock naked.
You probably read about the garment factory fire in Bangladesh at the end of last month that killed 112 people. News of the tragedy at Tazreen Fashions was picked up by everyone from the New York Times to Al-Jazeera, and a day of mourning was soon declared in the capital city Dhaka.
One very prominent voice, however, was notable by its absence: that of the fashion world. The exception is ENYCE clothing, owned by Sean "Diddy" Combs, who released a statement of condolence and promised a donation of $1,200 (£745) to each family who lost a member in the fire. Walmart, the Bangladeshi garment industry's single largest client, which accounts for 12% of exports alone, initially denied working with Tazreen Fashions, only later acknowledging their clothes had been outsourced to Tazreen Fashions by another supplier. But the fashion press? Silent.
Ashulia is an industrial area in Dhaka where workers are known to say that human life is worth less than the clothes made there. Sadly, the latest tragedy is not the first of its kind: 700 people have died in factory fires since 2006, according to the Clean Clothes Campaign. After China, Bangladesh is the second largest garment manufacturer in the world, with an export value of more than £12bn a year. Go check your wardrobe. It would be almost impossible not to own something made in Bangladesh. And yet the garment factory fire was not considered mainstream fashion industry news.
A War on Want report revealed last year that the vast majority of garments from Bangladesh sold in British stores such as Primark (whose profits rose to £3.8bn this year) are made by women aged 18-32 who struggle to survive amid poor pay and working conditions. Sewing operators' pay is approximately £32 (3,861 taka) a month and the women interviewed cited their average household spending on basic needs such as food, housing and education for their children at around £68 (8,896 taka) a month.
Anna McMullen, campaigns coordinator at Labour Behind the Label, said in a recent interview: "Multinational corporations, which exercise more power than many governments and make increasingly large profits, have the responsibility to ensure human rights are upheld for people who produce and sell their goods. The right to decent wages in the fashion industry is systematically abused both here and abroad. It is the scandal of our times."
Use our ethical fashion directory to find companies using fairly paid labour
In the winter of 2008-09, with America reeling from the collapse of Lehman Brothers, Giorgio Armani contacted Anna Wintour for advice. With a huge new flagship store on Fifth Avenue due to open during the approaching New York fashion week, he was deliberating over how best to PR the launch. (One does not attempt any major event at NYFW without getting Wintour onside. Basically, if Anna's not coming, your party is a massive fail, however many skinny actors you can herd down the red carpet and however fancy the goody bag.) Would a lavish party look insensitive given the economic climate, Armani wondered? Would a luxurious but more intimate soiree be more appropriate?
I was there on the night Armani opened his Fifth Avenue store with a low-key cocktail event and gave a speech to an audience that included Leonardo DiCaprio and Alicia Keys, announcing that, in lieu of a grand party, he was donating $1m (£0.6m) to New York City public schools, to celebrate the new store in a way that benefited the city. Standing at the podium, he was flanked by mayor Michael Bloomberg and Wintour. The night was a huge success, with praise and goodwill lavished on the Italian designer. Caroline Kennedy, a fundraiser for the charity Fund for Public Schools, called Armani "an example to all of us that even in difficult times we must continue to look at the future for hope and inspiration and let our children know that we are determined to help them build a better world". A well-placed source told me that night, off the record, that Wintour had been key in steering the plan.
So you see, Wintour does have some experience of diplomacy.
Wintour as an American ambassador would undoubtedly raise eyebrows. Leaving aside sniffiness about the inherent unseriousness of a woman who works in the fashion industry (which I find rather irritating, funnily enough), her decision last year to run a glowing 3,000-word profile of Syria's Asma al-Assad in US Vogue puts a serious question mark against her political judgment. But Wintour is generally acknowledged as whipsmart and extremely hard-working. She is enormously charismatic, a born networker, and a formidable fundraiser, as shown by the impressive $500,000 she raised for Barack Obama's reelection campaign.
Recent occupants of the US ambassador's residence in London have included a retired investment banker and a retired car dealership owner. Is a career as one of the biggest global players in an industry estimated to be worth $900bn to the world economy really so inferior and shallow by comparison?
Some significant developments have taken place in African fashion over the last five years. The first of these has to do with perception: African fabrics and fashion are no longer seen by western audiences and buyers solely as "traditional" wear (which was always just another way of saying what Africans made and wore lacked the finesse of western fashion).
Hand in hand with this has been the increasing use of African textiles and other craft and fashion elements by western designers, such as Louis Vuitton's use of the Kenyan Shuke in its Spring/Summer 2012 collection.
Yet another has been the growing number of African fashion designers who showcase their work on catwalks outside Africa. We've written about some of these, brands such as Mina Evans, Uzuri Couture and Wana Sambo, and if you follow African fashion blogs you will discover many more.
Nonetheless, marketing on a global scale remains something of a stumbling block for most African brands. That and international distribution. Western fashion brands do not rely entirely on their local markets, and African designers shouldn't have to either. This is where international organisation Fashion 4 Development (F4D) thinks it can make a difference: by preparing African designers to work with western retailers, and bringing the two together.
We are usually quite skeptical about Africa-related NGOs, as are most Africans, as so many of them seem to exist more for the benefit of the NGO workers themselves. Some people even believe many NGOs are outright cons, another way for Africa's wealth to end up in somebody else's pocket. Fashion 4 Development's non-profit arm – World Fashion 4 Development (WF4D) – isn't beyond such skepticism just yet, but so far it appears to be doing more good than harm.
The organisation was founded by Bibi Russel, a former model from Bangladesh who set up a system that helped to build an international reputation for the weavers and craftsmen in that country, and in doing so grew the industry and created jobs. She now "employs" around 150,000 local weavers and craftsmen/women.
That was where the idea was supposed to end, but in January 2011, Evie Evangelou saw the possibility of extending the idea to Africa, and set about doing so via the UN's media affiliate South South News. It attracted the attention of many fashion insiders and diplomats, the result of which is that F4D is now running similar projects in Ghana, Botswana, South Africa, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda. The key westerners involved are Evangelou (global chair), UN advocate Ray Chambers, Cesare Ragaglini, Italy's permanent representative to the UN and F4D's goodwill ambassador, and Italian Vogue editor-in-chief Franca Sozanni.
Last year Sozanni visited Ghana, Nigeria and Togo with Italian designer Robert Cavalli. The visit drew a lot of attention; was this just another case of influential fashion personalities looking for "inspiration" in Africa? Sozanni was working on a special issue of Luomo Vogue called Rebranding Africa in collaboration with F4D's chair Roberta Annan (May/June2012 issue).
This turned out to be one of those well-meant exercises that didn't quite manage to avoid peddling the same stereotypes about the continent that most of us find really frustrating. Then again, Vogue Italia's 2008 all-black edition and their 2011 Tribute to Black Beauties actually weren't bad at all, despite our, and many other people's, concerns about throwing crumbs to black models and designers so they'd shut up about not being featured the rest of the time.
Our feeling is that Sozanni's heart is in the right place, but she is still finding her feet because Africa and black people in general have been a neglected and therefore unfamiliar audience for Vogue for so long, so she is still prone to gaffs. For instance, who these days still uses the term "third world"? F4D does.
Anyway, the point of that troublesome Rebranding Africa issue was apparently to make the continent more attractive to westerners for its creative industries. Typically, Africa is promoted to investors for its minerals wealth or land.
Another reason Sozanni paid those visits was because she was developing F4D's Discovered in Africa project, the part that links African designers to retailers in the west, both online and brick-and-mortar retailers. As far as we can tell, Cavalli came along to scout for talent.
As Franca found during her visit, there are many designers in Africa whose work has global appeal. They just lack global name recognition and access to the same distribution channels as their European counterparts. So far, the first initiative has been a success. Discovered In Africa teamed up with Saks and online store Yoox to stock some selected African fashion brands alongside western brands that produce some of their clothes in Africa, and they sold out in two weeks. Among the designers were Koshie O (Ghana), Kofie Ansah (Ghana) and Tiffany Amber (Nigeria). All selected designers can be found here.
Made in Africa
Sozanni believes that there is potential for Africa to develop something akin to the Made in Italy stamp that is taken everywhere as a sign of style and craftsmanship. There are challenges, of course. For instance, not all selected designers are set up to supply western chains, or even have a website that is more than a Facebook page, so such designers need to be invested in, that is, they need money. Money is also needed to buy the collections from African designers. It costs €100,000 to buy the collections that were featured on the Yoox site. The cash has to come from somewhere.
But it's early days yet, and F4D seem to be taking the right steps. The benefits to African designers and craftspeople are already very real. We don't imagine the ride is going to be without hiccups, but for a change what's going on here is merely building on what craftspeople and designers are already doing, which is an improvement on the old NGO practice of going in and disrupting people's lives by telling them they need change what they're doing because their practices or products are completely wrong. If this is how the African crafts and fashion industries become suppliers to the world, that wouldn't be a bad result at all.
Fashion 4 development is also on Facebook. A longer version of this article can be read on This is Africa
The final gold medal for Team GB's outstanding showing at the Olympics has been awarded fashionably late. Stella McCartney, who created the kit worn by Great Britain's record-breaking team this summer, has been crowned designer of the year at the British fashion industry's most prestigious awards ceremony.
McCartney twice took to the British Fashion Awards podium at the Savoy Hotel, also receiving the designer brand of the year award for a label that this year has been worn on every red carpet and copied on every high street.
The accolades were an appropriate end to a triumphant year for McCartney. Dressed in a black taffeta jumpsuit of her own design on the podium, the designer described 2012 as "the best year to be British … and one of the most incredible years of my life." Her first London catwalk show in 16 years, in Mayfair in February, was favourably reviewed – but her contribution to the Olympics did most to boost her domestic approval ratings.
McCartney emerged the winner from a close three-way contest, with Christopher Kane and Mary Katrantzou also nominated. Kane, whose name has been linked with the prestigious design post at Balenciaga, recently vacated after the surprise departure of Nicolas Ghesquiere, had strong support from within the British fashion industry, while Katrantzou had vociferous champions on the international voting committee. It is a second designer of the year award for McCartney, who received it in 2007.
This was a night in which the breadth and depth of talent in the British fashion industry was rewarded at the expense of some of its most famous names. Neither Burberry, Alexander McQueen nor Mulberry were recognised, though there was a nod to the influence of Burberry in the model of the year award for Cara Delevingne, star of the label's advertising campaigns.
A stellar year for Roksanda Ilincic, with her dresses worn by Michelle Obama and the Duchess of Cambridge, was reflected in her beating stiff competition from McCartney and Victoria Beckham to win the red carpet award, her first British Fashion Award.
The ceremony was a testament to the huge success of the British fashion industry's concerted campaign to raise its profile and status by forging connections with other areas of British public life. McCartney's Olympic connection was a prime example, granting fashion a place at the top table at a time of national triumph. In her speech, McCartney noted how far British fashion had progressed since the time when her decision to leave Chloe and launch a London-based fashion label was met with bemusement and derision by French bosses who told her there had never been a global brand bearing the name of a British woman.
Samantha Cameron, fully signed up as an "ambassador" of the British Fashion Council, presented the new establishment award to Erdem, a designer whose dresses she favours. Princess Beatrice's appearance, handing the special recognition award to departing British Fashion Council chairman Harold Tillman, reflected post-royal wedding ties between fashion and the royals – the Prince of Wales recently hosted a reception in honour of London menswear catwalk shows. Architect Zaha Hadid presented the outstanding achievement award to Manolo Blahnik, architect of many of the audience's high heels. Music and film were also represented, with Ronnie Wood, Lily Allen and Salma Hayek among the presenters.
In the only award voted for by the public, Alexa Chung scored a hat trick, claiming the British style award for a third consecutive year.
How refreshing to read a designer saying, "once the clothes are on someone, that person should shine through", and how heartening to have incontrovertible proof that this particular designer has held firm to that belief throughout her 50 years in the industry. The phrase appears in a 1964 Observer piece, where "Britain's youngest, brightest, clothes designer tells – with some surprise – how she captured New York and is about to do so again". The name Mary Quant might spring to mind – but you'd be wrong, and a couple of years adrift. Nope – it's Caroline Charles, who is celebrating a distinctly stylish five decades by publishing what might be termed a "coffee-table book", stuffed with photographs and sprinkled throughout with diary and scrapbook cuttings. But to call it a "coffee-table book" makes it sound like something you might pick up for a 30-minute flick, when it's really much more than that.
There's hardly anything I love quite as much as a good romp through an archive. Caroline Charles – 50 years in fashion certainly provides that but, what it also does, in an unflashy way, is illustrate very vividly the lunatic scheduling, the travelling, and the sheer mind-numbing non-stop grind of life on the fashion circuit. For the 23-year-old Charles that meant a whistle-stop pop and fashion tour of 24 US cities in less than a month. Just reading about it made me want to lie down in a darkened room. But then it was one thing to get the 1960s spotlight to turn its beam on you and quite another to find the stamina, energy and creative ingenuity to keep it there. It must have taken an immense amount of inner steel, determination and personal discipline not to have let it all go to your head and just live in the "hip and happening" moment rather than take the far less sexy long view and build a name and reputation that would inspire respect and admiration half a century later. Charles is clearly made of stern stuff.
Looking at Charles' autumn/winter 2012 collection it's possible to see the evolution from, and references back to, the early days – and also to the 70s, 80s and 90s. The beautiful classic cut, high standard of manufacture and quality fabrics are the foundations upon which the label was built and the reason why so many wardrobes contain at least one Charles piece. Remember Emma Thompson receiving her Oscar for Howards End in a green-beaded bodice and wide trousers? Caroline Charles. I can't help thinking that in terms of the useful "cost per wear" measuring stick, a classic Caroline Charles must be virtually free.
I confess that being somewhat caught up in all the whistles and bells and trumpet-blowing that goes on around the more "disposable" side of fashion I had rather overlooked Caroline Charles but now, having done my research, I can see why she was described as "the thinking woman's designer" when she was awarded her OBE in 2002. There is a thoughtfulness and femininity about everything I see on the rails in her Beauchamp Place HQ or on the website. Maybe there's a hint of the irreplaceable Jean Muir about the simplicity of style and the attention to detail. I have a great fondness for beading and embroidery, which has the disadvantage of sometimes appearing a little fusty unless you choose carefully, but as an investment piece a little black jacket is surprisingly light and almost liquid in the way it falls from the shoulder, and the embroidered neckline is as beautiful at the back as the front. It would, I think, be the cause of a discreet indiscretion of my bank account.
Returning to something John Gale wrote in his remarkably prescient 1964 piece: "She is as the top now, and might stay there 50 years. How has it happened?" Well, not without hard work, persistence and an exceptional talent.
See the original Observer article from 1964 here (part 1) and here (part 2).
For many, Harris tweed may conjure images of itchy jackets worn by your grandad, fictional sleuths such as Miss Marple, or the local vicar. But no longer. The hand-woven fabric is now enjoying a giddying surge in popularity; it is hip, desirable and back on the high street.
The traditional Hebridean cloth is now featured in the central men's ranges of Top Man and preppy American retailers like J Crew, and can be found covering headphones, holdalls, North Face jackets, and Dr Martens and Converse boots.
Championed by Doctor Who star Matt Smith and the rapper Tinie Tempah, the tweed is being used on hand-stitched "hi-top" trainers and handbags produced by cottage businesses in Scottish market towns, but sold in Italian and Japanese luxury boutiques alongside Louis Vuitton and Marc Jacobs. This year, production is expected to exceed a million metres – the biggest production run for 15 years – every centimetre hand-woven at homes in Scotland's Western Isles.
The surge in production is evidence of a remarkable resurrection. Five years ago, the future of Harris tweed was bleak after decades of under-investment and poor sales. Production was half of this year's rate, at around 500,000 metres, and many feared the industry was in terminal decline.
The number of weavers – all self-employed, some crofters working part-time on their looms in sheds beside their homes as they juggled seasonal weaving with running smallholdings and other part-time jobs – had fallen below 100. Having learned their craft from parents or relatives, the remaining weavers were ageing. Few teenagers wanted to enter the industry. But now, after a five-year initiative partly headed by a former Labour energy minister, Brian Wilson, Harris tweed is enjoying a renaissance few had predicted.
There are now more than a thousand designs, from those blending in the traditional dull duns, purples and ochres of the Scottish Highlands, to brash patterns with bright reds, pinks and yellows.
"Probably the big success has been to transform the image of Harris tweed into a young fabric, a stylish fabric for a new generation," said Wilson, who founded the radical West Highland Free Press newspaper in Skye in 1972. "Our client list now has just about every serious designer; every fashionable designer is now working with Harris tweed."
Five years ago, Wilson and a small group of co-investors reopened a mothballed mill in the village of Shawbost on the west coast of Lewis. A Yorkshire textiles magnate, Brian Haggas, had bought what was then the island's largest tweed maker in Stornoway in 2006, in what was billed as a last-ditch rescue for Harris tweed.
Controversially, Haggas had decided to cut tweed production to just four designs, purely to make a set number of tweed jackets. The Haggas takeover was "a blessing in disguise, albeit heavy disguise," said Wilson. It made people focus on saving the industry.
The newly formed Harris Tweed Hebrides company, based at Shawbost, began targeting fashion shows, trade fairs and retailers. Wilson said the primary focus was to market Harris tweed's history and its reputation for quality, particularly in its traditional market in the United States.
Harris tweed is one of the world's oldest protected trademarks. Its distinctive "orb" label, guaranteeing its origin in the Western Isles and hand-woven production technique, was first licensed by act of parliament in 1910.Over the last five years, 40 new weavers have joined the industry, some returning to a craft previously practised by their parents. Some were spurred on by Donald John MacKay, given an MBE in this year's New Year's honours list after landing a remarkable contract to supply the sport shoes manufacturer Nike with 10,000 metres of tweed for their Terminator basketball range seven years ago, a period when the industry was in crisis.
The tweed industry – weaving, finishing and design – is now the Western Isles' largest private sector employer. With 140 weavers now working full-time on producing tweed, it generates about £10m a year for the local economy, which has one of the lowest rates of wealth-creation in the UK. The Shawbost mill now accounts for 90% of Harris tweed production.
"It was a very definite objective to take it into places where it used to be known and had kind of lost its way. That means mainly the US, because that used to be the main market," Wilson said.
He realised the company's promotional campaigning had succeeded not when a major fashion designer began buying Shawbost tweed but when the British high street retailer Top Man did so last year. Top Man is again using tweed for its tailored jackets, blazers and waistcoats, and a rucksack and men's shoulder bag.
Gordon Richardson, Top Man's creative director, said there was a strong interest among young men in "noble" fabrics like Harris tweed: fabrics with a history and tradition. "There's this whole mood for all things heritage," Richardson said. "So one of our ranges is using something that has a history and has a past, and has a resonance with something which has existed before, rather than something purely futuristic. There's also the whole British thing, so they love the whole heritage thing."
At the opposite end of the industry is Jaggy Nettle, based at Lauder in the Scottish Borders, whose products, featuring hi-top sneakers in Harris tweed, are stocked in expensive boutiques on 22nd Street in New York, in Tokyo and in Italy, alongside Prada and Louis Vuitton. Started 18 months ago by Jason Lee, a painter, and his partner Emily Quinn, a textiles expert, as an "anti-fashion" clothes design firm, their tweed product range, made by craftspeople in Fife, has expanded.
Last week, Lee took possession of newly made tweed Chelsea boots and trainers. He chose Harris tweed, he said, because their clothes are not designed for one season or one trend, but to last. "I bought a Harris tweed coat from a charity shop in Hawick made in Galashiels. I have had that coat for eight years, and I've never had to wash it. That's my real aspiration for a fabric: its lack of wear and tear, the way it repels water and dirt."
Now, said Wilson, tweed-weaving is again central to island life for the Western Isles. Weavers are spread across the islands, boosting the local economy.
"The objective was to create a new generation interested in it: the great thing is you're selling something which is truly genuine," Wilson said. "It's not like spinning a story around something which doesn't exist. It's completely genuine: the distinguishing features of Harris tweed are both quality and heritage."
Why is he leaving?
Cathy Horyn, fashion critic at the New York Times, reports that part of the reason for his exit is related to financial matters and the way some of the areas of the business were being given a more commercial tone. Another issue raised by Horyn, and also reiterated by a source speaking to the Guardian, is that the creative freedom given to Hedi Slimane, recently appointed as creative director of Saint Laurent, by PPR bosses, who also own Balenciaga, had irked Ghesquière. It is also reported that some of Ghesquière's team had decamped to work for Slimane, a situation that would have rubbed salt into the wound. Horyn concluded: "Mr Ghesquière could wind up doing something with LVMH (there is already talk about that), or just take a little break." Insiders say that Ghesquière negotiated a 10% stake of the company when he joined Balenciaga, which could leave him in a healthy position to pursue his own fashion label elsewhere …
OK, so where's he going?
Certain quarters of the fashion desk (ie me) have speculated that Ghesquière will eventually take over from Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel. Not, of course, until Karl is ready to leave. Our sources tell us this is one of the rumours within the industry, too. Let us note that in his last collection for Balenciaga, Ghesquière included a series of short bouclé-style skirts, some with matching jackets, some with gold buttons. Just a teensy bit Chanel, no?
Right, so he's going to Chanel?
Hold on. Suzy Menkes, an influential fashion writer for the International Herald Tribune, quoted an anonymous industry source (hey, maybe it's the same one as ours!) who said Ghesquière had been courted by Bernard Arnault, chairman and chief executive of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, the arch-rival of PPR. She added that Arnault did not return calls in regard to this matter earlier in the week. Meanwhile, an anonymous LVMH employee described the Ghesquière situation as "delicate".
Then it was about ego all along?
Let's call it creative differences. Womenswear Daily reports friction with management as key to the joint split, suggesting relations between Ghesquière and chief executive officer Isabelle Guichot had become particularly tricky. In response suggestions that the designer's exit might potentially hurt the brand, Guichot said the "brand is strong enough, developed enough and structured enough to express itself without fear. Now the company is so mature in its organisation, in its processes, the business is really moving forward."
Meanwhile, in a piece published on style.com on the day of the announcement, Ghesquière is quoted as saying: "That's the thing in fashion ... because if you do not move, then you are dead."
But why now?
A British Vogue story has put Ghesquière's name into the frame as a possible choice to relaunch Schiaparelli, a label currently being revived by Italian business titan Diego Della Valle. Though Erdem Moralioglu, the London fashion week star, is currently hot favourite, the designer himself reportedly denied knowing anything about Schiaparelli. Ghesquière is an obvious choice given his availability and proven track record for reviving old houses, but it seems as if the idea of his own label or bagging a more high-profile job would make for a far stronger career move.
I see. So we don't rightly know what he'll do next. Do we know who is replacing him at Balenciaga?
Balenciaga's Lionel Vermeil confirmed that there is currently still no set date for the announcement of Ghesquière's successor, but Guichot has said there is a shortlist of candidates for the role. "It won't be a drawn-out transition," she has reportedly said. Designers' names already floating about include Alexander Wang (too sporty?), Christopher Kane (too connected to Versace?) and Proenza Schouler (supported by Anna Wintour, who may have influence?). London cool kids JW Anderson, Mary Katrantzou and Thomas Tait are other names being bandied around, though their appointments all seem riskier choices. Joseph Altuzarra and Bouchra Jarrar are also apparently in the mix.
What does our fashion insider say?
One name that hasn't been greatly discussed is Natacha Ramsay, Ghesquière's first assistant, who an industry source speculated to the Guardian might be on the list. A quieter choice, it wouldn't be the first time a designer from within a team had successfully taken over. See Phoebe Philo at Chloé during the Stella McCartney years, and more recently Sarah Burton, following the untimely death of Alexander McQueen. However, if all the conversations regarding Ghesquière's exit are to be believed and revolve around turning the brand into something more commercially minded, a bigger, well-known name might seem like the more obvious way to go.
It may be an object of derision throughout the fashion industry, but the Ugg boot – a bit like the bootcut jean, or the square-toed office-boy shoes – has refused to die. Over the past 10 years, sales continued to rise, and their squat, solid, shearling-lined shapes became the footwear of young Britons nationwide.
Until now. The newest sales figures from Deckers, the Ugg parent group, are down 31%. While this has been put down to mild weather, and prices of the boots rising, it's a minor victory for fashion. While not defeated – prices will be reduced in a bid to boost sales – its footwear nemesis is showing signs of weakness.
In truth, these signs have been there for a while. Uggs are undeniably comfortable – they're more often worn as slippers in their native Australia – but the ubiquity of them, and their many imitations, has led to overkill. Bad press has been growing. In a survey in 2010, they were voted one of the 10 items men don't like on women and a judge recently ruled they can be dangerous to wear while driving.
They originally gained fashionability in 2001 when they were worn by celebrities including Cameron Diaz, but recent advocates include Joey Essex: hardly an advert for a chic, off-duty look. Rana Reeves, founder of brand agency John Doe, believes this has damaged the reputation of the brand. "I'd say they're in a similar position to when Daniella Westbrook wore Burberry," he says. "They need to go back to basics."
That's certainly not something the brand has been doing recently. Instead, expansion has been the policy. With sales increasing by as much as 67% in one quarter of 2009, confidence has been understandably high – and has led to some questionable ranges appearing alongside the classic boot. The firm has expanded into high-heeled styles with price points over £300, handbags, and even a bridal collection. It might be a case of one spongy step too far. "Ugg's core product is seasonal," says Honor Westnedge, senior retail analyst at Verdict Research. "While it has tried to diversify into new ranges, these have struggled to achieve the same level of popularity as its winter boot collections."
Westnedge points to the relatively high price of Uggs as a problem, "in a period of limited discretionary spending", and suggests that consumers are unlikely to buy more than one pair. There's also the issue that they may simply be out of vogue. New competitors in the boot market include Hunter, Le Chameau (the brand favoured by the Duchess of Cambridge) and, recently, Converse. In contrast to Ugg, Hunter has seen its profits rise – 38% last year – and style leaders from Kate Moss to Sarah Jessica Parker wear its boots. Reeves believes its success is down to a savvy marketing policy. "They stay true to what they are," he says. "They're functional, they keep your feet dry. Hunter have done some collaborations but they have never tried to be fashion. That's what Ugg did, and that's where they went wrong." Fashion has long rejected Uggs – it looks like the rest of the populace is finally following its lead.
1. Crap gloves Uggs are only unfashionable on your feet. Stroll around with them on your hands and people won't know what to think.
2. Insulation Got an uninsulated pipe about the size of your shin? Whack an Ugg on it. Problem solved.
3. Weasel beds Most weasels find their beds cold and uncomfortable. Let's do something for them, guys.
4.Fashionista repellent A single scrap of Ugg boot worn on a lanyard around the neck will keep away all but the most foolhardy fashion snobs. Win.
5. Safer throwing boots Tired of accidentally braining a six-year-old when you hurl your wellingtons across the park? Softer equals safer.
Judging by the reactions on Twitter yesterday, fashion insiders were just as surprised as the rest of us when the news broke that Nicolas Ghesquière would be leaving Balenciaga, the label he has been creative director of since 1997. British Vogue editor Alexandra Shulman called the 41 year old "unarguably one of the biggest talents in fashion", while street-style photographer Tommy Ton described himself as "totally blindsided and in shock". The plaudits are still coming.
The designer parting ways with Balenciaga is certainly something of a shock. Profits for its parent company PPR, which also owns Gucci, Alexander McQueen and Stella McCartney, were up 6.6% in the third quarter of 2012. Cathy Horyn, fashion editor of the New York Times, said that PPR's founder, François-Henri Pinault, was a supporter of Ghesquière, deciding to stick with him when the retail group bought Balenciaga more than a decade ago. Spotted backstage at the spring 2013 show, Pinault had been masterminding the label's expansion into the Asian market.
Ghesquière has been instrumental in making Balenciaga relevant for a new generation. Originally founded in 1937 by Spanish designer Cristobal Balenciaga, the house was known for a sculptural use of volume, nipped in suits and vivid colour, signifying looks that were popular until Balenciaga retired in 1968. Ghesquière gave these codes a modern touch. "He was one of the first to dust off an iconic house and introduce a whole new generation of fans to the brand," says Gabrielle Hackworthy, fashion director of Harper's Bazaar.
Honing an aesthetic known for its layered silhouettes, innovative fabric choices and a touch of bad taste, Ghesquière has managed to make scuba-wear, ditsy florals and sci-fi logos into edgy must-have items. Spring/summer 2013 was no exception. Style.com praised his ability to "season in and season out … put an utterly modern gloss on intense study of the house's archives". An association with Kristen Stewart (the face of the Florabotanica perfume) also gave the brand a mainstream element, which can't have hurt sales.
With sales up and critical acclaim from all sides, you have to ask what's behind this decision. While some commentators have mused that other brands in the PPR stable (Yves Saint Laurent and Gucci) are being prioritised, there's little to be read from Pinault's statement, which describes the decision as "joint" and praises Ghesquière's "incomparable creative talent". Perhaps Ghesquière, who has so far remained silent, felt it was time for a new challenge. No names have been put forward as his replacement, and for now the fashion world is far more interested in working out Ghesquière's next move. The New York Times is reporting rumours of his own label at LVMH.
"I am shocked that he has stepped down," says Hackworthy. "But also so excited about what his future holds." She's not the only one.
A new book brings together the fashion photographer's best work from over 40 years, including extraordinary images of Cindy Crawford and Vogue's Grace Coddington
Leather flooring, oak panels, swish sofas that wouldn't look out of place in an expensive hotel: the new men's shoe department in London's flagship Selfridges store clearly means business. Part of a major revamp of the entire Selfridges menswear floor, the new shoe section will sell more than 3,000 styles, from bespoke Tom Ford boots to £25 flip-flops. It will be the biggest men's shoe department in world, and its unveiling this week will bring with it more than a staggering 72,000 pairs of shoes – it also heralds a new era for the way men shop for fashion.
Arranged across 10,000 square feet, the Selfridges shoe department has been designed by Belgian architect Vincent van Duysen and includes a made-to-order salon featuring floor-to-ceiling sliding-glass doors. Its carefully manicured design reflects a growing desire among male consumers for high-end, avant-garde fashion.
"It's an incredibly exciting time," says David Walker-Smith, director of menswear for Selfridges. "The introduction of London Collections [men's fashion week] has been an important step forward for the industry and shines a spotlight on British fashion."
Exclusive products by a diverse mix of labels, from Versace to Dr Martens, will go on sale while in early 2013, while the first Christian Louboutin boutique for men will also open there. Directional fashion, from leggings to £3,000 cashmere coats, is also doing a surprisingly swift trade on the shopfloor. Adam Kelly, buying manager for men's designer wear, says "There is definitely a demand for more catwalk fashion," he says. "We now get customers coming in with catwalk images from style.com and telling us which pieces they want to buy from the collections."
It's a trend that extends beyond the looming walls of the central London department store. "We have definitely spotted the rise of an increasingly fashion-literate men's customer, who follows the runways and comes into the store knowing what the key pieces for the season are," says Stacey Smith, menswear buyer for high-end boutique Matches.
At online menswear store Mr Porter, the personal shopping team receive emails from customers straight after fashion shows expressing interest in looks they spotted on the catwalk. Buying manager Terry Betts reports that in 18 months of trading, Mr Porter has seen the emergence of a new "really strong fashion guy."
"Historically in menswear, the catwalk pieces were the dressing and the majority of the sales came from the more classic things," he explains. "But we've noticed that there is a customer who wants the really visual pieces from the shows."
Balenciaga's knitwear, Givenchy catwalk sweatshirts and Jil Sander's whale jumper have all been recent hits. Mr Porter re-ordered the Sander knit due to a waiting list. These catwalk pieces have become "some of highest grossing items and we have sold them in volume", says Betts.
The proliferation of fashion online has been integral to this boom. "Real fashion being worn by real men, making trends more accessible," is how Jessica Punter of GQ sums up why men's style blogs such as Tommy Ton are so popular.
Betts believes menswear collections have also improved. "Collections are stronger and designers are braver in terms of fabrics and colour," he says. "The customer is also more informed – catwalk shows used to be quite elitist, but now there is just more access, whether it's live-streaming shows or seeing the pictures online soon after the show."
Luxury brands are also investing in menswear. Burberry, who reports that during the last financial year men's accessories were the fastest growing area of its business while sales of men's tailoring doubled, opened its first UK standalone men's store in Knightsbridge this week. Alexander McQueen has just opened a new menswear space on Savile Row ahead of showing its men's mainline collection for the first time in the capital in January during the second London fashion week for men. Response from industry insiders to the inaugural event, which took place in June, has been positive. And it has been a commercial success too. "All the designers we've seen or spoken to since have seen a massive uptake in their books so it really has paid off," says Punter.
From the artistic whirl of postwar London to the swinging 60s, Terence Donovan made his name photographing the best in British fashion. A new book brings together highlights from over 40 years of his work, including extraordinary images of Cindy Crawford and Vogue's Grace Coddington
In the greyness of postwar Britain, with rationing still in force for food and clothes and the cities spattered with bomb sites, the dazzling creations of Sir Norman Hartnell, Sir Hardy Amies and milliner Frederick Fox were visions from a fairytale, unattainable to all but a handful of the wealthiest.
Some of the fabulous survivors, worn to royal weddings and society parties and then folded away in tissue paper, together with supremely elegant contemporary photographs by Norman Parkinson, will be seen in Hartnell to Amies: Couture By Royal Appointment, an exhibition opening in November at the Fashion and Textile Museum in London.
Hartnell's elegant line and beautiful fabrics, combined with sumptuous embellishment by his famous team of hand embroiderers, created some of the striking evening gowns in the exhibition, including a dress and coat designed in 1953 and believed to have been worn to Queen Elizabeth II's coronation ball.
Although it appears green in Norman Parkinson's contemporary photographs – which have changed colour over the decades – the coat is sky-blue. It is coming to the show on loan from guest curator Michael Pick, biographer of Hartnell, who is about to launch a biography of the designer's great rival for royal and society patronage, Hardy Amies.
Other gowns, almost all loans from the people who bought and wore them, include the dress worn by Lady Anne Glenconner when she married Colin Tennant in 1956, one of the society weddings of the year if not the decade. It was where Princess Margaret met the wedding photographer, Antony Armstrong-Jones, whom she would later marry. Tennant himself had been tipped by the tabloids as a suitor for the princess: "I don't expect she would have had me," he said later. Tennant, who died in 2010, went on to buy the island of Mustique in the Grenadines, which became a holiday paradise for high society – and society gossip columnists.
Celia Joicey, director of the museum in Bermondsey, which was founded by the designer Zandra Rhodes and is now owned by Newham College and used for training students as well as exhibitions, said the detailed work in the clothes is dazzling. "To see the sheer quality of some of the gowns, you need to turn them inside out to appreciate the hand work in the boning, linings and every detail invisible when the garment is worn – one wedding gown has a tiny blue bow stitched into the lining, as the something blue for the bride."
The exhibition celebrates the opening of Norman Hartnell's first salon in 1923 as a landmark in British fashion, re-establishing traditions of hand tailoring and a distinctive English cut. Hartnell went on to create both the Queen's wedding dress in 1947, and coronation gown in 1953, both setting much-copied fashions for anyone who could afford the fabrics or get hold of the coupons.
As princess and for decades as monarch, Elizabeth also patronised Sir Hardy Amies, who began as a designer at Lachasse, which was famous for elegantly tailored suits, and went on to become one of the most successful menswear designers, launching the first recorded men's catwalk show in 1959.
The exhibition also features millinery by Australian-born Frederick Fox, whose hats made the small figures of both the Queen and her mother stand out in the crowd in innumerable photographs.
Hartnell to Amies: Couture by Royal Appointment, Fashion and Textile Museum London, November 16 - February 2013
Prank TV can be hilarious when it creates absurd situations to tease the rich and powerful. Justin Timberlake was on the edge of tears after "taxmen" threatened to requisition his dog; Ali G persuaded a former UN secretary general to justify Disneyland's absence from the general assembly; and E4's Fonejacker talked a model agency into bringing his whole family along to a casting.
But E4's latest show, The Work Experience, has a cheaper target in its crosshairs. It is premised on humiliating those willing to do anything to get a job in the glitzy world of high fashion. Celebrities such as grime rapper Lethal Bizzle play bit parts to trick two real-life young hopefuls into thinking that they're unpaid interns at a fashion PR agency, Grade PR. In fact, hidden cameras are everywhere, and the young interns in episode one, Thomas and Aquila, have a host of fake colleagues who engineer nightmare situations for them to create what's billed as "an internship from hell".
Some of these incidents could be pretty funny in a conventional comedy. One scenario sees Shussi, the stressed creative director, deciding to shower an albino model with fake tan before covering his back by blaming the intern: "You got me an albino model and blacked him up. And you fucking blinded him!" Indeed, the show only works because interns patiently get on with their work amid farcical conditions.
It would not have been possible to create a prank show in which the power dynamics were inverted, with the interns mocking the bosses, as the young people would have simply been fired. Clearly, the programme-makers recognised this could make its audiences feel guilty about laughing. So a crude satire on the egos of absurd fashionistas is tacked on, as agency MD Joanna tries to sleep with the models and Shussi routinely bursts into tears through his manscara. The subtext is that it's all right because we're laughing at how ridiculous the fashion industry is, not that young people are prepared to humiliate themselves in their desperation to get a job.
The audience's consciences are also meant to be assuaged by the news at the end of the show that the interns will be offered real placements at top firms – cue shots of their delighted faces, hugs and comments about how they were happy to be in on the joke. And to cover themselves for the inevitable criticism (a scene in a later episode sees the interns asked to collect sperm to artificially inseminate Joanna), the programme's press materials and website all emphasise the idea that it's OK to laugh at the interns' ordeals because it all ends up happily ever after.
But ultimately the show leaves a bad taste in the mouth, because in real life, The Devil Pays Nada.
At Intern Aware, we hear about examples of unambiguous exploitation on a daily basis. One fashion industry hopeful spent four months working for free to design and create a range of hats, that later were sold at a major London department store for several hundred pounds each. When she asked to keep a hat to add to her portfolio, her boss generously offered her a staff discount instead. In the basement of a major music production company, 10 unpaid interns are engaged full-time transferring albums from vinyl to MP3 for months on end. And while The Work Experience interns were trained to clean designer clothes, in one London art gallery, interns report that they learn the ropes by cleaning the loos.
Unpaid internships are becoming a prerequisite for jobs across the whole economy, not just in the larger-than-life worlds of fashion and media. The IPPR thinktank estimates there are as many as 100,000 interns who are not paid the national minimum wage in Britain, in most cases doing real work that the government's lawyers say should be properly paid. Despite this, HMRC is utterly failing to enforce the minimum wage, and in our frustration, we have teamed up with employment lawyers to help interns get their pay back.
Before the recession struck, young people didn't need to chase humiliating "opportunities" to work for free to avoid unemployment. Now, with youth unemployment at dangerous levels, employers have so many applicants that they often only interview candidates who have spent months as interns. In this environment, it's no surprise that as many as 150 people applied for the two fictitious internships on The Work Experience.
Mulberry, the luxury handbag maker, took a battering with nearly £190m wiped off the Somerset company's value after falling out of fashion in Asia.
Mulberry warned annual profits would be below last year's after a double whammy of weak orders from overseas department stores and the decision to stop supplying small retailers in Italy and Belgium whose stores it considers too downmarket.
Panmure Gordon analyst Philip Dorgan cut his profit forecast for the year from £42m to £31m. Last year Mulberry made £36m profits. "Given that it has had a tremendous run in terms of both share price and profits, it is now at the crossroads," said Dorgan. "Either, we are wrong about the scale of its international opportunity, or this is just a blip. While we are not entirely satisfied about all of the reasons given for the profit warning, we tend towards the latter view."
The shares closed down 314p, nearly 24%, at £10.06.
The scare comes after luxury fashion house Burberry issued its own profits warning last month, blaming stuttering demand in the Chinese market over the summer. China is the big prize for the luxury goods industry and is expected to become the biggest single market by 2015. The prospect of weakening demand has sparked fears of another downturn in the sector.
The profit warning is a fresh setback for Mulberry - whose bags are carried by, and indeed named after, celebrities including Alexa Chung and Lana Del Rey - which has been a stock market darling. Disappointing annual results in June jolted the shares and combined with Tuesday's warning the stock has lost 60% of its value since May.
Total sales increased 6% to £76.5m in the six months to 30 September. Within that, retail sales rose 13% to £46.5m but wholesale shipments fell 4% to £30m.
The finance director, Roger Mather, said Mulberry was not a brand in trouble but was experiencing growing pains under Bruno Guillon, who joined as chief executive from Hermès earlier this year.
Mulberry's Bayswater and Alexa bags usually sell for £800-£1,000 and Guillon sees scope to move further upmarket, designing bags commanding price tags of up to £1,500. He was behind the decision to cull wholesale accounts though the result is a £5m sales shortfall this year. Its handbags were being sold alongside cheaper labels rather than the likes of Gucci and Prada which it regards as its rightful competitors. Some wholesalers had also been selling on unsold goods without permission. "It's important to keep the sales channels pure and under control and not have wholesalers misbehaving," said Mather.
Mulberry is pressing on with plans for a new factory in Bridgwater which will create 300 jobs and double its manufacturing workforce in the UK. Mather said it would break ground in 10 days with the plant expected to open in May. "In Asia if customers think they are buying a bit of English craftsmanship and design they want the label to say 'made in England,'" he said.
Fashion has a new black, and it is blue. But not navy, or Klein blue, or cobalt, or lapis, or turquoise, or cerulean. This season's shade is Tory Blue, and everyone who is anyone is wearing it.
This has been a very British coup. While the front row has been preoccupied with the Kate Moss vs Middleton debate, the price of Céline trousers and the practical problems raised by capes, a much bigger shift has been happening in front of our eyes. The British fashion industry, which for a long time naturally sided with the alternative over the establishment – with bare nipples, club culture, men in skirts and the thrill of making old dears at bus stops tut in disapproval – has switched sides. The change has been so slow, and so subtle, that it has gone almost unnoticed. Rather than storming the catwalk, the Conservative party has quietly taken over what was once traditionally liberal territory, moving the picket fence inch by inch until the party is happening in their back garden.
The relationship between fashion and Downing Street has never been closer. Nearly 30 years after Katharine Hamnett wore a 58% Don't Want Pershing T-Shirt to meet Margaret Thatcher, Samantha Cameron has become a regular fixture in the London Fashion Week front row. This seems to defy the logic of David McCandless's famous "left versus right" infographic, a visual representation of what falls in the left and right wing. The "society and culture" section shows those on the left wing bonded around an ideal of evolution ("The world can be improved. Bring in the new") and those on the right bonded around an ideal of status quo ("Protect the good things about the world.") How can fashion, an industry built on a desire for newness and for constant forward movement, have jumped into bed with the status quo?
Every recent government has been at pains to get the creative industries onside as visibly as possible. But it is striking, now, to look at how male-dominated the Cool Britannia era of New Labour was. The Gallaghers and Young British Artists who were the high-profile guests at No 10 are a stark contrast to Cameron's appointment of Anya Hindmarch and Tamara Mellon among a list of business ambassadors. Public alliances with dynamic female businesswomen have been utilised by Cameron as part of the Tory decontamination strategy. "I suppose, looking back, New Labour was quite boysy in terms of networking with creative industries," says Jane Shepherdson, who rose through the Arcadia ranks to become brand director at Topshop before leaving to become CEO of Whistles. "Cherie Blair was out of her comfort zone with fashion, and that probably had an impact on the culture of Number 10."
But some believe it is fashion itself that has had a change of heart. Brenda Polan, fashion editor of the Guardian in the 1980s, says, "Things have changed so much. Fashion now is so dominated by the luxury brands that the subversive, questioning aspect has faded from view. The young people who are coming into the industry now see themselves as part of a marketplace. These days, everyone wants the big job at Louis Vuitton."
Shepherdson agrees that "the mood in fashion now seems to reflect the fact that people are less engaged. In my early days at Topshop, fashion was all about shocking people, all about what was happening on the street. It really wasn't about money – or at least the influence of big money wasn't as obvious as it is now. These days, even the small fashion magazines are in thrall to the big labels." Alexandra Shulman, editor of British Vogue, has been frustrated by a lack of enthusiasm for political engagement in the industry, on both sides. "At the last election, when Vogue ran a story about how 'fashion' was voting, we found it nearly impossible to get any quotes," she remembers. (Henry Holland, who was quoted in the piece as saying, "I'm voting Labour", was the exception who proved the rule.) "It seems that the current British designers do not have particularly strongly held political beliefs or, if they do, show no inclination to make them public. I don't know why there is such apathy, particularly at this time, when we need politicians to do a better job."
However, Polan argues that fashion's anti-establishment period, from the 1960s to the 1980s, was just a blip. "I grew up with the 60s concept that art and fashion were linked to the expression of rebellion, and that this subversive quality was part of fashion. But, in hindsight, that period was an aberration, a product of the baby boom and the investment in education and in art colleges in particular. When you take the long view, fashion has usually been a hobby for the rich. It is about exclusivity, not about rebellion."
The fractious relationship between fashion and feminism is another factor. Fashion is an industry that employs a high percentage of women, and one of the few in which women hold a high proportion of the most powerful positions – as retailers, designers and editors. "Fashion has a great number of strong women running their own businesses," Shepherdson says. "This is an industry in which women do well and where their voices are heard. And yet it is often seen as being in opposition to feminism." Professor Angela McRobbie, who has written extensively about fashion and feminism, says, "The idea that feminism meant being anti-fashion is a widely circulated and damaging myth. Feminists raised issues about the sexual politics of fashion, but that didn't mean they gave up on it or dressed in hideous items. It is in the nature of feminism to be angry and engaged, and in fashion's PR-led worlds this is unacceptable." Polan, who moved to become women's editor after her stint as fashion editor, says, "There have always been feminists who loved fashion. But it is still difficult and complex to champion fashion per se, because there are aspects of fashion that are very problematic for women."
The issues of fashion, politics and feminism have been foxing and frustrating glossy magazine editors for years. When Hillary Clinton cancelled an appearance in American Vogue for fear it would send the wrong message, Anna Wintour bemoaned the move in her editor's letter, saying that "the notion that a contemporary woman must look mannish in order to be taken seriously… is frankly dismaying… We have moved on from the power-suit mentality which provided a bridge for a generation of women to reach boardrooms." And Shulman recently cited Yvette Cooper as her ideal subject for Vogue, while acknowledging that, "it'll never happen… I think she would feel it would damage her". There is, as Polan notes, "a puritanical streak in the British psyche that says that if you are interested in fashion, you can't have a brain. Women are wise to be wary of that. But actually, fashion is much more complex and interesting than football, isn't it? It can inform much more about politics and psychology than sport."
Shulman is droll when I raise the subject. "I would love female politicians to be more interested in fashion. But, of course, one has to accept that many perfectly interesting people aren't." However, to some politicians who are scared of what showing an interest in fashion will do to their brand image, what the current government has done is find a way to frame fashion in an acceptable way. By emphasising fashion as an industry and an employer, rather than as either art-college craziness or witless showing off, it has found a way to stand shoulder to shoulder with the industry.
"I am not convinced that this has been simply a case of the current government harnessing fashion," Shulman says. "Sarah Brown worked with the BFC [British Fashion Council] also. But it wasn't her world in the way that retail and fashion is Samantha's world. The fact that Samantha Cameron was in the industry previous to being prime minister's wife has brought in links to people like Anya Hindmarch, who is a committed Conservative." Shepherdson agrees, pointing out that, "Samantha Cameron looks incredible in catwalk fashion, so those photos make the newspapers, but that's not the whole story. It was Sarah Brown who began to make those connections with fashion, to host the industry regularly at Number 10. And the BFC has worked hard to make the industry attractive to government. There has been work on both sides of this relationship. The BFC has made fashion more establishment, in a sense, which is perhaps the cost of bringing in government support."
British fashion has become more businesslike, both in structure and in mood. The gravitational pull of financial support has perhaps steered the aesthetic of the catwalk away from one-legged trousers and towards dresses that can be worn by Samantha Cameron. "Fashion has converged in this rather cosy space, where it has settled comfortably for playing an ambassadorial role," McRobbie says. "Photo opportunities to fly the flag are worth so much to the designers that other issues, and different kinds of questions about politics and fashion, get pushed to the side."
The power of the luxury brands may appear to have moved fashion into the domain of the elite, but, Shepherdson says, "Today's consumer looks at catwalk shows and she knows that those looks will soon be available at her price point. So it's naive to think that expensive fashion isn't relevant to ordinary people. And I'm not comfortable with lamenting a notion that British fashion used to be avant-garde, or that being businesslike and commercial doesn't matter. If no one wears it, it's not fashion, is it?" And fashion is a chameleon. Wintour once wrote, "Fashion reflects the times just as much as a headline in a newspaper does." And, right now, the London Fashion Week headlines are being written in blue..
Less than a year since 212 went viral, Azealia Banks' assault on the fashion industry has been almost as much of a smash as her breakout hit. Her look in the accompanying video – Mickey Mouse jumper, cut-offs and pigtails – was a reflection of the scene she inhabited; the eighties-inflected, beat-up style of hipsters everywhere. Topshop, Terry Richardson and Lady Gaga stylist Nicola Formichetti came calling.
Now Azealia Banks has been named as the new muse for New York's king of downtown, Alexander Wang. Starring in a film for his T line of jersey basics, she's bouncing around to her Van Vogue track, hair flying, in a cropped top, bomber jacket and tube skirt. If Lana Del Rey is going mass as the face of H&M, Banks is becoming an icon of cool.
Her style stock has stayed consistently high in the last year. Telling the New York Times that she wears "a lot of clothes that's (sic) going to get dirty and look cool once it gets dirty," nothing is ever too put together. Del Rey's false eyelashes, nails, bouffant and liquid eyeliner look fabulous – but it's a commitment. Banks looks carefree. At the Serpentine party in June she was dressed in a sequin A-line dress, neon jelly shoes and a huge grin. The look was mermaid meets club kid, in the best possible way. Other notable outfits include a sleek python bodycon LBD of Wang's design, which she wore for the red carpet of April's Met Ball – and the cat face, ears and pink fluffy dress to perform at the aftershow.
An element of the kook is always part of Banks style – and that recalls a young Chloe Sevigny. While Banks might be a 21-year-old African-American from Harlem – contrasting with Sevigny's white suburban upbringing – they share a precocious eye when it comes to mixing street and high fashion. You never quite know what you're going to get with either of them. Still yet to release an album, you suspect Banks has got a lot more style – as well as music – to give.
Some of the world's most famous models speak frankly in a new documentary, About Face: The Supermodels Then and Now, about the treatment of mature women by a global fashion industry notoriously obsessed with youth but gradually giving ground to those in middle age
A coroner has blamed the fashion industry for the death of a schoolgirl found hanged after becoming convinced she was overweight.
Michael Rose, the West Somerset coroner, linked the death of 14-year-old Fiona Geraghty directly to the industry and called on magazines and model agencies to stop using very thin models.
During the inquest in Taunton it was claimed that other girls at the public school she attended, King's College in Taunton, had taunted her about her weight. There was also criticism from her family of the way she was discharged by a community psychiatric nurse after being seen only four times.
Recording a verdict of misadventure, Rose attacked the fashion world. "The one class of person not here who I hold directly responsible for what happened is the fashion industry," he said.
"The problems of eating disorders amongst young people, particularly girls, did not exist before the 1970s. From that period onwards the fashion industry and the magazines promoted thin models and the thin figure.
"I do ask, particularly the magazines in the fashion industry, to stop publishing photographs of wafer thin girls. I do implore it, because at the end of the day for their benefit, families like this must suffer. It is, I am afraid, an increasing problem and until they control themselves it will continue."
Fiona was found hanged at the family home in Nailsbourne, near Taunton, in July last year.
Before the verdict was given Richard Biggs, head teacher at King's College, vigorously denied Fiona had been bullied about her size. He told the inquest: "She was involved in a disagreement with third form girls. My understanding of the incidents with the other girls was that they were more along the lines of clashes of personalities, which I don't think are unusual at that age.
"I do believe the right action was taken and the problem was sorted out. I think to say she was isolated would be completely wrong. She was not taunted about her weight. The girls we have spoken to say that was never the case."
The inquest was told there had been an increase in the number of cases of eating disorders health authorities were dealing with, especially involving pupils from independent schools.
Alison Chisholm, services manager at Somerset NHS Foundation Trust's child and adolescent mental health service, said: "We are not sure what the reasons are. But there has been a significant increase in the rates and complexity of the disorders over the last 18 months. A higher proportion of those referred come from independent schools rather than the state sector."
The coroner accepted that the school dealt with Fiona properly. He said it was unfortunate that the psychiatric nurse had apparently not spotted how serious the girl's problems were.
Rose said: "This is one of the most tragic cases to come before me in the four decades I have sat in Taunton. Fiona was on the threshold of life. She was intelligent, charming and attractive and someone with a lot to live for.
"Unfortunately Ross Gillanders [the nurse] was unable to spot her much greater problem. But a lot of eating disorder cases are transient. In my experience mental health services are usually the 'Cinderella' of the national health. More funds should be given to it."
After the conclusion of the inquest King's College issued a statement saying: "Fiona was a charming, talented and lively girl who lit up our school and she is deeply missed by her many friends here.
"I welcome the coroner's statement that there was no evidence of bullying at our school, and that our pastoral care policies were a standard to which all schools, both state and private, should adhere.
"We work assiduously to create a caring and supportive environment for all our pupils and this tragedy only makes us more determined to do so."
He may not become monarch for a while yet, but for the next four days he is undisputed king of the front row.
With London's first ever week of men's catwalk shows hot on the heels of the jubilee, the Prince of Wales has become the man charged with leading the British menswear industry into battle with the titans of France and Italy.
On Thursday night Prince Charles hosted several hundred fashion industry representatives at a reception at St James's Palace to herald the start of the menswear shows on Friday.
The lure of a gold-embossed palace invitation was a significant coup for the British Fashion Council in its battle to attract the world's most powerful buyers and editors to London.
Despite stiff competition from parties hosted by Tinie Tempah (featuring crazy golf on the roof of Selfridges) and retailer Mr Porter (with DJ Alexa Chung), the St James's Palace invite was the week's hot ticket.
Prince Charles told those assembled at the reception that the suggestion he was known for his good dress sense had come as a surprise: "I am finding it very hard, ladies and gentlemen, to live with myself after I discovered that somebody has suggested I might even be an icon of fashion. It has taken 64 bleeding years."
He added: "I have gone on in my old way, like a stopped clock – I tell the right time every 25 years."
On Thursday night, among this most fashionable of crowds, there was a noticeable bias towards the Savile Row tailoring favoured by the Prince. Silk pocket squares outnumbered ironic baseball caps by around 12 to one. Starch and cologne lingered in the air; waistcoats were de rigeur.
Tinie Tempah was elegant in a white dress shirt and black evening suit by Spencer Hart, while David Walliams wore a bespoke three-piece suit by Tom Ford.
Menswear by Margaret Howell and Claire Malcolm of Hardy Amies will be on display at the reception, alongside designs by Christopher Raeburn, the winner of the emerging talent in menswear award at the most recent British Fashion Awards.
Prince Charles's role was a sign of more than just a wish to capitalise on jubilee fever. The Savile Row tailoring tradition and a drive to promote British craftsmanship are a key part of the message of this fashion week. Those steering the event are keen to move the image of British designer menswear on from the creative-but-crazy label and into more commercial territory.
This is a shift which has been successfully made in womenswear, where the London collections are now a slick and respected element of the global industry rather than an eccentric afterthought.
Writing in Vogue two years ago, Prince Charles demurred from being labelled "fashionable", but acknowledged "there have been those generous enough to call me well dressed". The prince is a longtime customer of the shirtmakers Turnbull & Asser, whose shirts are made in a small factory in Gloucestershire, and the distinguished Savile Row tailors Anderson & Sheppard.
"Clothes have to combine style with sustainability," writes the prince in the current issue of GQ magazine, "and I find British-made tailoring more than meets that challenge – much to the amusement of my staff, who are sometimes surprised to find that what I am wearing turns out to be as old as or even older than they are."
This week's showcase for British designer menswear hopes to capitalise on new findings which show that while women are cutting back on luxury fashion and spending more on high street purchases, men are prioritising luxury purchases.
Research by American Express shows men's year-on-year spending on luxury fashion grew by 1% in 2011, while mainstream fashion spending fell by 1.2%. In contrast, women cut back slightly (0.7%) on luxury fashion, while increasing spending on mainstream fashion by 5.2%.
 Rosie: 'I've never been to anything like this before but was enticed by the David Bailey and Nigella Lawson talks. My jacket and shoes are by Topshop, my dress is by Asos and my bag is by Mulberry.Hannah: 'Before the Vogue Festival the only fashion events I'd really attended were things like The Clothes Show in Birmingham but nothing with talks and lectures like this. I'm interested in the panel discussion tomorrow, to hear what models have to say about the fashion industry. My jacket is vintage, my dress is by Oasis and my shoes and socks are by H&M'
In the print room at Central Saint Martins, it's as if I'm watching a high-budget dramatisation of how fashion works. To my right, 20-year-old students in top-knots, rubber gloves and Violent Cancer T-shirts hunch over their silk-screens. And to my left, the British Fashion Council's new "young style ambassador", Alexa Chung, is posing against their paint-splattered door in a dress by Peter Jensen, a designer who, like Stella McCartney and Alexander McQueen, studied in this institution.
It's like a 3D timeline, from inspiration to success. It's fashion physics. Style algebra. Student x Central Saint Martins + Alexa Chung = trend. I take a deep breath of the inky fumes and cough indelicately. A fire alarm shocks through the building and everybody calmly begins to file down the stairs in a cloud of pink hair and enthusiasm, Chung singing quietly along to the rhythm of the alarm. Could fashion really be this simple?
Mulberry's "Alexa", their £700 satchel, was inspired by a vintage Mulberry briefcase they'd seen Chung using as a handbag. Last year the brand quadrupled its profits, in part due to the sell-out success of this one bag – a bag that Chung was photographed carrying in all its leopard-print, calf-skin, patent, oversized incarnations. Even aside from the pieces that carry her name, Chung's boyish style (she appears frequently on Vogue's "best dressed" list) has been harvested and replicated, with Chung-ian touches (mannish brogues, Peter Pan collars) flooding the high street. She is a force of fashion. Why?
"Alexa is one of those rare girls who is beautiful, but with a look that somehow still feels achievable," explains Grazia editor Jane Bruton. "She is as reliant on clever high-street finds as she is on designer pieces, and she doesn't do unrelenting glamour, she does clothes for everyday urban life, rather than the red carpet. Therefore her style becomes more transferable than that of a lot of the A list."
Are Chung and her contemporaries (including Kate Middleton, who helped Reiss double their profits when she wore their dress in her engagement photo) aware of the impact they can have on an industry that depends on such wobbly variables as taste, and weather?
Mat Bickley is the founder of Joyn, a digital marketing consultancy that works with fashion brands to track and analyse online responses to celebrities, establishing just how they affect sales. According to him: "Celebrities are aware of their influence, if not exactly who it is that finds them influential. Many celebrities start by endorsing other people's brands, but quickly move into the arena of fronting their own collections."
Chung, for example, designed a leather-backed coat for Madewell, which Grazia said triggered a "bin man" trend. "Victoria Beckham made the successful leap from ambassador to fashion brand, and ranges like Kate Moss for Topshop have been some of the most lucrative initiatives found on the high street," Bickley adds. Watching Chung's languid stroll among the fashion students, their camera phones discreetly snapping, I wonder how much she thinks about the impact she has on the way they dress.
"It's a bit surreal," Chung says of her huge commercial influence, propping her chin on her hands. "I don't deal with myself as a 'brand'." Her scrunched eyes imply she's embarrassed even to admit she's aware of such a concept. "So I'm told about the influence I have, but it's not 'me'. It's 'Alexa Chung'. It does make it difficult to shop, though. I walk around thinking: 'Hmm, everything's a bit samey.' Then I realise that the stuff I think is samey – like the saturation of Peter Pan collars – comes from… me."
She doesn't have to do much shopping though – clothes come to her. "Yes, but that easy access to fashion has cheapened it a bit for me. It's a fast pleasure now – I miss that thrill I felt when I got my first Mulberry bag. I've lost that hunting instinct. So even though I can wear anything now, it's not any easier to get dressed." She has, she says, 'a floordrobe'. "But I've gained clarity…" Clarity? "I can see the difference between wanting to buy into a brand and being inspired by a certain piece. Do you know what I mean?" I think I do.
It's a privileged skill, but one that's certainly helpful for her new role with the British Fashion Council (BFC), for whom Chung's first job (and the reason we're meeting) is spokesperson for the British Designers Collective, a pop-up store that runs for six weeks at Bicester Village, showcasing emerging designers' work. Harold Tillman, chairman of the BFC, elected Chung because, he says: "Alexa's fashion influences are evident in the industry through her roles as creative director, brand ambassador for several labels and muse to designers. All credit to her distinctive personal style." Chung styled herself for our Central Saint Martins shoot, shuffling through the rail of designers from the Collective (including Peter Pilotto, Marios Schwab and Jonathan Saunders) with the cold hand of a professional.
Angling herself into a heavy crystal-studded sweater by Christopher Kane (one that, when she wore it to an awards show, ripped every silky gown she walked past), she squeals. Is she hurt? The hairdresser spins round, alert and meerkatish. "Why can't I wear this every day?" she gasps. "It's 'Barbie princess from 1986', isn't it? It turns you into a human crown. I look so… rich." As well as being an expert at picking clothes, she is, it turns out, pretty good at talking about them. "And because it's so heavy you feel really 'at one with the earth'. Which is good," she turns to me, faux-sincere, "because I do want to sound 'grounded'."
As a teenager, Chung applied to study at Central Saint Martins. "But I didn't get in," she says, with a sad emoticon face. "So I feel a bit jealous of these guys," she adds, waving her hand in the direction of the fashion studios, "like I want to join in. I should've done this. I'm from a family of designers, so this feels very natural to me. And I veered into TV, but always end up in fashion one way or another. I suppose, even though I didn't get in to Saint Martins, I managed to leapfrog the process.
"And I'm genuinely really excited to be an ambassador for British fashion, especially after spending so much time in the US. That's where I realised why I'm proud to be British. With our manners, and our self-deprecation. And the way we have fun! London Fashion Week is so different from any of the others. Compared to the strictness in New York, London seems freer from commercial constraints. Truer to the process, to street style, to a sense of humour."
Her sense of humour, always cheeky, always dry, breaks only when she feels like she's not being heard. The photographer is persisting with a shot that's not working. So she takes a swig of Coke and puts her foot down. The photographer's assistant averts his eyes as she quietly explains about the light, and the dress, and the pose, and when he takes a shot she asks: "How does it read?" It's unusual to hear a model talk back and I tell her it was a bit thrilling. "When I was a model," she whispers, "I started with an opinion, but was encouraged to lose it. It began as play-acting, but then I lost sight of myself a bit: so when I did the audition for Popworld and they asked my opinion, I felt like crying with happiness."
We trail through the building together, the knitting room with its quiet roar, the balconies' vast, clean floors echoing with the sound of her wobbly heels. In the print room she is taken with the drawing of a Mexican queen that a student called Milligan Beaumont is turning into a scarf. I hear her complimenting the student gently, saying: "Don't you think it would be amazing as a shift dress, in black and white?" Beaumont ignores the suggestion. "Maaake it, maaake it," Chung chants, jokily. "I'd wear it!" Beaumont doesn't take the bait.
Upstairs, in a box-like room behind the MA students' rails of glittering dresses, sits Professor Louise Wilson, director of Central Saint Martins' fashion course, and the person many credit with having shaped British fashion over the past decade. Since 1992 she has taught Alexander McQueen and current stars Mary Katrantzou and Christopher Kane; former students are employed at Céline, Balenciaga and Louis Vuitton, and 90% of her graduates have gone straight into work. The dresses Chung is shivering into downstairs were conceived under Wilson's eye.
How important does she think people like Alexa Chung, whose style is proved to sell clothes, are to the industry? Wilson, who, in her black poloneck has the air of a cartoon queen – regal, ferocious and aggressively intelligent – sighs pointedly. "The autonomy of education gives us the freedom not to think about the importance of people like Alexa. To be free-speaking, not networking." She pauses, to make sure I understand her point. "If we were 'following'" – if her students were too aware of those on "best dressed" lists – "that'd be a problem. Not wanting to be disdainful, but it's important for us that we're fighting against it."
I ask Wilson a question I've been pondering: how does fashion work? Bickley at Joyn talked about how digital has affected consumers' expectations of customer service. Chung is an example of the impact of influential bloggers and celebrities. How can Wilson, the person behind the clothes we wear, explain the process to me? She locks me in a look. I lean forward to hear her secret. "There aren't 10 easy fucking rules, OK?" OK. "You wouldn't ask Freud: 'Can you show me how to make a painting?', would you? You wouldn't dream of asking an F1 driver to show you quickly how to build a car. How does it work? How do you lick a cock! Listen, it's a life experience. It's about skills, education. Sorry, mate, not everyone can be in the club." Again, a sigh. "The problem with British fashion," she says, "is that it's got too fashionable."
Alexa Chung is the spokesperson for the British Designers Collective and will launch the store at Bicester Village on 21 March (bicestervillage.com)
A bright, sunny summer will be followed by a dark and gloomy winter. That's the long-range forecast from the fashion industry, as a month of catwalk shows filled with the designer collections for this autumn draws to a close.
The pastel shades and perky full-skirted shapes currently on shopfloors will seem a distant memory by September, when the new collections go on sale.
"This has been a season defined by a mood rather than a trend – a darker mood, which has shaped the majority of the shows," says Anne-Marie Curtis, fashion director of Elle. "When Valentino, usually the prettiest and lightest of labels, opens with sharp black leather, that tells you something."
Justin O'Shea, buying director of the online retailer MyTheresa, agrees. "What Miuccia [Prada] called the 'celebration of prettiness' in fashion is over for now. The pastels are gone and there's lots of black, bottle-green, aubergine. Velvet and brocade and leather – rich fabrics that are not overly feminine – are going to take over when autumn comes."
Pistachio, apricot and lemon, the ice-cream parlour colours of summer 2012, are set to be replaced by bluebottle shades of black, green, purple and cobalt.
The abrupt change is not, however, seen as likely to confuse customers. As Paula Reed, style director of Grazia, puts it: "It's hard to wear layered black in the summertime. And our reader will enjoy her broderie anglaise moment all the more for knowing that it won't last."
High necklines are a headline trend for next season, seen at Chanel and Stella McCartney – and in the second collection by Kanye West, who might be expected to prefer a more overtly sexy silhouette. "The clothes we have seen are very unfleshy, even for winter," notes Alexandra Shulman, editor of British Vogue. "It is austere, almost puritanical, with high necklines. We have seen more coats worn over trousers, than dresses."
Ruth Runberg, buying director of Browns Boutique, agrees that "high necks, long sleeves and floor-length hemlines are everywhere".
Some in the industry see a parallel with the newly covered-up silhouette, and the expansion of fashion into markets with a more modest aesthetic. "The high collars, the coats worn over trousers – I think you can see evidence of fashion looking at other cultures and finding beauty there," says O'Shea.
Curtis agrees that "the Asian market is having a real impact. We have seen a shift since Asia has overtaken Russia as the important new market. It was interesting to see how covered-up Dior was this season. I thought that was a strong statement about who their customer is."
Shulman has a different interpretation. "I don't think it is a new customer dictating this aesthetic," she says. "Growth is coming from lots of different countries and cultures, including South America. It seems to me that designers in Europe are making clothes for a new European age of austerity."
The darker note struck by this season's catwalks reflect the fact that "it's bleak out there," says Shulman. "But it's complicated, because the fabrics and the techniques are expensive, so it is still a lavish aesthetic rather than a belt-tightening one."
The resurgent London fashion scene has had repercussions on the catwalks of Milan and Paris. "London designers have led the maximalist revival over the last few seasons with increasingly strong, vivid prints," says Runberg, "and this season, we've seen the collections take the next logical step from two-dimensional prints to three-dimensional embellishments like pearls, sequins, rhinestones and embroidery. The effect is almost baroque in some cases."
Pointing at Prada and Vuitton as evidence of the trend, O'Shea agrees that "there is a regal feeling, with lots of embellishment."
British fashion design has also been instrumental in steering Paris fashion week. A quartet of British women – Sarah Burton at Alexander McQueen, Phoebe Philo at Céline, Clare Waight Keller at Chloé and Stella McCartney – produced hit collections this week.
"There's a healthy tension you can explore as a British designer working in Paris," said Waight Keller before her Chloé show, "between the very correct sensibility of the French and the more relaxed view of style that Brits have. When you mix the two you get an easy sophistication that I love."
With the autumn catwalk season finished, the industry is now looking ahead to 2013. "Many collections played it a bit too safe this season," laments Runberg. "I am hoping the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art Costume Institute exhibit on the radical, boundary-breaking work of Schiaparelli and Miuccia Prada [opening in May] will inspire a bit more risk-taking next season."
This is the kind of remark I often hear about my efforts to establish fair labor standards for models working in the American fashion industry. Modeling is a seemingly glamorous profession, and models are certainly not the people you picture when you think of bad working conditions. But wipe off the sheen and another reality emerges.
At 29, I have worked as a model for over half my life, and I'm the first to admit that I've been lucky in my career. I have worked with some of fashion's most talented, creative people as the face of some of the industry's most recognized brands. I enjoy modeling, a job that not only paid my bills, but also allowed me to put myself through school. I have no reason to speak negatively about an industry that has given me so much. And, yet, I can no longer stay silent about rampant abuses that I have experienced firsthand.
The modeling business today is unregulated and relies on a compliant labor force of children. Sexual abuse and systematic theft occur at the highest levels of the industry, and because models are considered to be "independent contractors", the rule of law in terms of workplace standards does not exist. Sadly, the notion that fashion is frivolous encourages a dismissive, misogynistic attitude toward the industry's young workers, and it is precisely this sentiment that allows the abuse of vulnerable young people to persist.
When I entered the business as a 14-year-old schoolgirl, I was routinely asked to do topless shoots and pose seductively. To this day, in an industry dominated by minors, there is no policy of informed consent for jobs involving full or partial nudity. A recent survey shows that 86.8% of models have been asked to pose nude at a casting or job without advance notice.
Sexual abuse is a pervasive problem. Consider just the last few years: in 2008, fashion designer Anand Jon was found guilty of rape and multiple counts assault on aspiring models, who ranged from 14 to 21 years old. Last year, models began to speak out in numbers against Terry Richardson, one of the industry's most powerful photographers, who has been accused of pressuring models to disrobe at castings and conducting shoots that involve what he claims are consensual sex acts performed on him by models. (Among Richardson's regular clients are H&M, Vogue, and GQ.)
What is worse, in an industry where the majority of models start their careers before age 16, most working unchaperoned and far from home, the incentive to say nothing in order to keep your job creates an unconscionable environment of coercion.
Lack of financial transparency is also a significant problem. Last year, three models brought a lawsuit against their New York agency Next for allegedly withholding $750,000 of their earnings. Like the plaintiffs, I also left Next after becoming increasingly wary of their opaque bookkeeping, and I was paid the outstanding earnings they owed me only after my lawyer threatened legal action. As a model, simply getting paid can be a major issue, and, of the models who achieve a coveted spot walking in New York fashion week, many, in fact, are never paid at all; instead, working for free or for clothes. Needless to say, a tank top doesn't pay the rent.
To combat this systemic abuse, I recently formed the Model Alliance, a nonprofit organization that aims to give models in the American fashion business a voice. With the support of other top models (Coco Rocha, Doutzen Kroes, Crystal Renn, Shalom Harlow), industry leaders, and the Fashion Law Institute at Fordham Law School, we produced a draft models' bill of rights to demand fair treatment from modeling agencies and clients. Our backstage privacy policy, endorsed by Diane von Furstenberg and the Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA), aims to protect models from invasive photography while they are naked and changing backstage at New York Fashion Week. The Model Alliance has also partnered with Actors' Equity and the American Guild of Musical Artists (AGMA), members of the AFL-CIO, America's largest federation of trade unions, to establish Model Alliance Support, a confidential grievance service to members who have experienced any kind of abuse.
Our glossy industry often provokes superficial criticism of models' weight and body image, but the fact is that most models' clout in their workplace is as tiny as their size-zero frames. It is time to delve beneath the surface and consider models' concerns from a labor and public health standpoint. Photographs of models pervade our culture, and we cannot promote healthy images without taking steps to protect the faces of this business. This effort starts with giving the faces of this business a voice. Correcting these abuses starts with seeing models through a different lens: not as dehumanized images, but as human beings who deserve the same rights and protections as all workers.
The writings of famous American radical and leftist community organiser Saul Alinsky are not the first things that come to mind when thinking about the plight of models working in the New York fashion industry.
Sara Ziff is aiming to change that.
Ziff, a New Yorker who has walked catwalks for Prada and Calvin Klein, will next week launch a workers' rights organisation aiming to improve the lot of a section of the American workforce usually more associated with glamour than poor working conditions: the modelling industry.
Ziff, 29, gives lie to the prejudice that models are just pretty faces. She has studied at Columbia University in New York, where she specialised in political science and came across Alinsky and other heroes of the American anti-poverty and workers rights' movements. "I think that Alinsky's Rules for Radicals made a very big impression on me," she said. "There is a sense that fashion is frivolous and a lot of people don't understand models wanting to organise for for better labour conditions. They probably see the profession as a privilege," she added.
So here comes Ziff's brainchild: the Model Alliance. It will start its membership drive from its launch date of February 6, aiming to sign as many as 1,500 models working in the New York industry.
Its aims are simple. They are to protect working models from exploitation, especially from sexual abuse, and to improve the lot of its members in terms of pay and working conditions. It has drawn up a "Models' Bill of Rights".
Model Alliance is even in talks with several groups about a scheme to help models get decent healthcare coverage, reflecting an all too common concern of American workers, whether building cars in Detroit or picking tomatoes in Florida.
Ziff, however, is adamant that the Model Alliance is not a fully-fledged model's labour union. Perhaps that is wise given the widespread hostility in America's corporate world to labour organisations. "We are not a union. We are a non-profit group working with the industry trying to establish basic rights," Ziff said.
Indeed, the picture Ziff paints of the average life of a working model is a long way from the glamourous life that many people would imagine. Instead it is a job of long hours with often little pay. In fact some models are expected to work for free and others are paid in clothes, not cash. They are hampered by being usually treated as "independent contractors", which gives them few workers' rights, and it goes without saying that many are very young and vulnerable to exploitation.
The net annual income for a model is just $27,000 a year. "People are blinded by the glamour of the industry. People are not aware of the age of some of the people. Some of them are very young, working without chaperones, and sometimes working for free," Ziff said.
A particular problem in the modelling industry is sexual abuse. "Sexual assault – I would not say it is common – but it exists," said Ziff.
Ziff has exposed it already via a documentary she made in 2009 called Picture Me. The film revealed seedy goings on in the world of high fashion, including sexual advances by photographers and other senior industry figures, often on very young girls.
On the Model Alliance's website models are encouraged to talk about their problems with the industry via personal testimonies: an innovation that Ziff puts down to her understanding of Alinsky. "He emphasised the importance of storytelling and how it is a very kinetic activity. So we use first person experiences. We are giving models a voice," she said.
One model, Dana Drori, describes being 15 years old and feeling uncomfortable as a much older male photographer asked her to take off her clothes. Other problems have nothing to do with sex. Another model, Jessica Clark, worries that she has been "complicit in the commodification of myself" through the use of her non-white ethnicity as a selling point for work.
"Throughout my career, my agents and I have used my ambiguous ethnic heritage to our advantage and profit," she wrote.
Ziff says the response she is getting from senior figures in the industry has been supportive. In part, this is because Model Alliance is seeking a deliberately non-confrontational path and also because, at least when it comes to the issue of guarding against sexual abuse, it is hard to be against it.
It has won support from big names, such as Diane von Furstenberg, who heads the Council of Fashion Designers of America. It is also working closely with the Actors' Equity Association and the American Guild of Musical Artists to set up an grievance reporting system whereby models can relate problems of abuse and exploitation. Both Equity and the Guild are members of the AFL-CIO, America's largest federation of trade unions, giving Model Alliance a link to the broader American labour movement.
Ziff is thinking big too. If Model Alliance works in New York and helps improve the lot of its members she wants to take the organisation nationwide. "In a perfect world, that's what would happen" she said.
Yet despite Ziff's best efforts, there is still something different about a workers' rights movement organising itself in the fashion industry of the Big Apple. When Ziff kicks off its membership drive next week it won't be with a march through the streets. Or a bake sale or pancake cook-off to raise much-needed funds. Instead it will be with an evening cocktail soiree at Manhattan's swish and trendy Standard Hotel.
Being a supermodel isn't easy. Especially when you've not hit puberty. Last week Cindy Crawford's daughter Kaia made her modelling debut, for Young Versace, at 10. Donatella Versace said: "Like her mother, Kaia has a very special gift. The camera really, really loves her. It was a special treat watching Kaia walk in her mother's footsteps."
Betty Lowe, daughter of designer Pearl, has been modelling for her mother's range for Peacocks from the age of five. "I know it seems odd that I would let Betty model at this young age. But she loves the limelight. It's not like she's in beauty pageants," says Lowe. She draws the line at make-up, however. "No. Absolutely not."
Meg Mathews, ex-wife of Noel Gallagher, has a picture on Twitter of her 11-year-old, Anais, taken by fashion photographer Mario Testino. The image has been compared to Kate Moss's early pictures. Anais is now signed to model agency Select.
While you're unlikely to make it as a model by the age of 11 unless you have at least one celebrity parent, it's now not unusual to see models barely in their teens on the runway and in magazine adverts.
Carole White, director of Premier, one of the UK's leading model agencies, says it worries her that several of the big fashion houses in New York and Milan, including Prada and Balenciaga, have started using girls aged 13 or 14 to front campaigns or do catwalk work.
"They're looking for a specific image and they want a girl no one has used before." This doesn't really happen in London, she adds. "For London Fashion Week, girls have to wait until they're over 16. We have to provide documentation," says White. "Before then it's possible that they could work, but it would be unpaid, editorial work."
White appeared in last year's TV documentary The Model Agency, which featured Premier models such as Darya, 18, signed at 15, and Leomie Anderson, now 17, who was spotted by one of White's team walking home from school. She says it's common for girls to be scouted from the age of 13, although they won't work for a couple of years. "They don't actually do anything [with a model agency] at that age. You tend not to do anything until they're 15. They just get used to having their picture taken in the school holidays. And having lots of Polaroids done," says White.
Fashion PR Debra Bourne is co-founder of All Walks on the Catwalk, which campaigns for diversity of age, shape and ethnicity in fashion. "Hard competition drives them to scout models incredibly young, for fear of losing out," she says. "If models start being used by 15 or 16, this gives the model agency a lead-in period to build the relationship. But I would argue that, emotionally, this is a huge amount to contend with at that age, even though good agencies will argue that they are there to fully protect them."
Renewed controversy about the age of models has been brewing for a while. Last year a Prada campaign featured Ondria Hardin, 13 at the time the advert was made with director Steven Meisel. In November an advert for Marc Jacobs's perfume Oh Lola! was banned for featuring 17-year-old actress Dakota Fanning in a "sexually provocative position". The Advertising Standards Authority ruled that "the actress actually looked to be under the age of 16".
Canadian model Coco Rocha, 23, recently complained in a US television interview that "15 is way too young to be a model". "I was scouted at 14, started modelling at 15 and lived in New York at 16," she says. She has done runway shows for Marc Jacobs, Anna Sui and Stella McCartney and was the face of advertising campaigns for Gap, Dior and Yves Saint Laurent. She now feels her early career was too much for her. She says girls are taken out of high school, away from their parents and put into an industry "that treats them as adults, and they do not know how to work with that. They are just thinking, 'How do I please you?'" Rocha also said that a year ago she was losing out on modelling jobs for being "too big" – at size six and 7st 7lb. More recently she has been told she is "too small".
Sitting next to her on the TV show was actress and model Carré Otis, 43. She started modelling at 16 and now thinks this was too young: "I don't think any young girl should be put in that situation."
Although it is supposed to be hard for girls to get work under the age of 16, increasingly younger girls seem to crop up. The Wall Street Journal recently profiled 15-year-old Valerija Sestic, a Swiss-Croatian model who did 16 shows in 15 days at New York Fashion Week on her first trip to the US. The Council of Fashion Designers of America recommends that no girls under the age of 16 be cast in catwalk shows.
In December 15-year-old Julia Schneider won the Elite Model Look Contest in Shanghai. Last year an edition of French Vogue edited by designer Tom Ford featured 10-year-old Thylane Lena-Rose Blondeau in a Dynasty-style outfit slashed to the waist. Child actresses Elle Fanning, 13 (sister of Dakota), and 14-year-old Hailee Steinfeld have signed modelling deals with Marc Jacobs and Miu Miu.
Victoria's Secret model Behati Prinsloo, 22, has spoken out about what it was like to be "discovered" at 15. "There's no one that helps models figure out what they should do or helps them with their money. It's especially hard for under-age models." She added: "You have to figure it out on your own. It's very stressful, it's a lot of travelling, a lot of time away from family, a lot of dealing with stuff you shouldn't be dealing with at that age."
The preference for younger models also influences the aesthetic: the younger she is, the more likely she will be skinny and boyish. Psychologists at the University of Queensland in Australia and the Centre for Appearance Research at UWE in Bristol are investigating whether we respond as negatively as the fashion industry claims to images of women who don't resemble a slim 16-year-old.
The author of a 2011 paper entitled "Waif goodbye!", Dr Philippa Diedrichs, created a series of adverts using a size eight and a size 12 model and interviewed women about their feelings and likely purchasing decisions after looking at the images. Younger women, aged 18 to 25, reported feeling despondent about the size 8 picture. They said they would be more likely to buy something if it was advertised by a size 12 model. This research is ongoing and if it becomes influential the fashion industry may be forced to challenge the mid-teenage aesthetic as the norm for the "idealised woman".
Caryn Franklin, a former presenter of the BBC's The Clothes Show, lectures on body image and works with All Walks on the Catwalk. "I question why the industry is so attracted to the pre-pubescent waif to the point where it seems like arrested development," she says. "Why are we wanting to promote an underdeveloped young woman as a feminine icon? I'm glad that as an industry we are talking about it, but there is a desire from some design labels not to engage in responsible and considerate practice. Fashion likes to think it's making dramatic artistic statements. But it's last in line to understand the impact of its decision-making on the psyche of women both young and old."
How young, then, is too young for fashion? And what's too old? "Sixteen is a good age to start," says White. "Seventeen is the perfect age for a model, because most girls feel comfortable in themselves by then; 18 is good too, though, because then all their schooling is out of the way. If a girl started at 20, she would find it difficult to get work. Her agent would probably lie about her age and say she was a year or two younger."
• This article was amended on Monday 23 January 2012 to make changes to the headline and standfirst.
Look closely at that curve in the waist, the arc of the hand: do these models look unnatural, not to mention surprisingly similar? It's only once you see them lined up that it becomes clear – they are computer-generated mannequins with the heads and skin colour of real models added. Which makes dummies of us all for not realising sooner.
After Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet revealed that H&M was using plastic women to model its clothes online, the retailer retorted that the practice was "commonplace" in the fashion industry. It even sent a link to a website where you dress fake models in your own clothing selections. Besides, it uses such lifelike mannequins to sell clothes to both men and women. So that makes it OK then?
Yesterday's response from H&M, the world's second biggest retailer, was particularly ironic given that youth groups and schools are today to give evidence to the all party parliamentary group on body confidence on why girls and women, and increasingly boys and men, are so distressed about the way they look. Several studies, including one on media influences on girls between nine and 12 by Marika Tiggemann and Levina Clark, indicated that nearly half want to be thinner, and as a result have engaged in a diet or are aware of the concept of dieting. Sexist imagery in advertising is nothing new: witness this season's Harvey Nichols ad. In 2003, Teen magazine reported that 35 per cent of girls 6 to 12 years old have been on at least one diet, and that 50 to 70 per cent of normal weight girls believe they are overweight
Natasha Walter, author of the aptly named Living Dolls: The Return of Sexism, says: "What's so extraordinary about the H&M models is that everybody would just accept it. That says something about how normal it has become to use artificial images of women. We just brush past them. The worrying thing is it gets into your head, particularly the heads of young women."
One way forward is for the Advertising Standards Authority to insist on a disclaimer in the same way it did with mascara companies pretending that fake eyelashes were down to the stroke of a brush. A spokesman for the ASA says all advertising has a "social responsibility" to resist any possible "mental, moral and physical harm", especially on young minds. However, it can only act on complaints and so far it has received none.
Susie Orbach, psychotherapist and writer, sees a silver lining of sorts: "Perhaps this will expose the constructed nature of the images more graphically than all the critiques of Photoshopping. Perhaps it will be easier to say: this body does not exist, it is a fiction." We live in hope.
Fee and KJ discuss one of the worst offenders for unpaid internships
Revenue and Customs is planning to raid fashion companies employing unpaid interns in breach of minimum wage laws, the Guardian has learned.
Internal documents from Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs show it believes interns across the employment spectrum to be at "high risk" of abuse under national minimum wage laws, and that HMRC has convened a 12-person taskforce to make unannounced inspections of businesses where interns are being used as workers rather than just shadowing staff.
The special "dynamic response" unit will have powers to question managers and sift through accounts until it is satisfied that no abuse is taking place.
It is the first time intern abuse has been targeted by the HMRC, which is responsible for the enforcement of the minimum wage. It follows heavy criticism from the Low Pay Commission over the lack of enforcement action.
Companies such as clothes store Urban Outfitters have advertised for nine-month unpaid internships.
Topshop, owned by billionaire Sir Philip Green, also offers month-long unpaid internships although it says the role only involve shadowing employees, not actual work.
Fashion house Vivienne Westwood has previously advertised for a three-month unpaid internship which required a high level of prior IT skills from would-be applicants.
The HMRC internal briefing document also highlights the growing nature of the intern problem.
It says that over the past few years there has been a significant rise in the number of UK employers offering internships. It adds that the HMRC should target the fashion industry for the next six months because it is "well known for the use of interns".
The Guardian recently revealed government lawyers had advised Department of Business ministers that "most interns are likely to be workers and therefore entitled to the [national minimum wage] and other worker rights".
An HMRC source told the Guardian it would be targeting a range of firms, from the multinationals to the smallest design company.
"If you are in that industry and you have interns, there's no reason to think that we won't be knocking on your door," they said.
The source also said the campaign was aware of the sensitivities about approaching interns themselves who may fear being "blacklisted" in later employment.
"We do appreciate that we might not want to walk up to an intern and ask, 'Are they paying you?'
"Obviously by the time we leave, life might not be so great for the intern at that place. We are aware that there is a sensitivity there."
The source added that the team would have the power to "look at whatever they need to look at to assure themselves that the people who are working there are getting paid what they are due".
Rachel Johnson, editor of lifestyle and fashion magazine The Lady, said her interns only come for a week and they are offered expenses and lunch money, and that anyone who is asked to stay on for longer is paid a wage.
She said: "We don't have any long-term unpaid interns … because it is not fair on them. It is inequitable only to take on the children or young people of families who can afford to subsidise them.
"It's unfair to those who cannot afford to work and not be paid … I think the whole new model economy of unpaid work is not a good one for entry-level employment at all."
Tanya de Grunwald, founder of website Graduate Fog and who is running a name and shame campaign called Pay Your Interns, said: "I am pleased to see HMRC at last taking the illegal internships issue seriously.
"For over a year now, I and the other interns' rights campaigners have been complaining loudly that the existing reporting system – which requires exploited interns to blow the whistle on their own employer – was fatally flawed.
"Unpaid Interns are desperate for experience and a reference so why would they report somebody they are trying to impress?
"We told HMRC that the burden must be removed from the interns' shoulders. It seems that they have listened at last."
She added: "HMRC is right in thinking that fashion is one of the worst industries for taking advantage of their young workers.
"The thought of being spot-checked will have the fashion houses' lawyers shaking in their expensive shoes."
Campaigners have been battling for an ethical fashion industry ever since the first sweatshop scandals broke back in the 1990s.Even now, Ethical Consumer magazine's latest buyers' guide reveals that a sweat-free high street is still a long way off.
Anton Marcus, joint secretary of the Free Trade Zones and General Services Employees Union in Sri Lanka believes the single biggest barrier to progress is access to free trade unions:
Progress might be slow, but it's not all doom and gloom. Take the example of the campaign led by the Responsible Sourcing Network to stop forced child labour in Uzbekistan's cotton industry. Over 60 global clothing companies, including Adidas and H&M, have now committed to ban Uzbek cotton from their supply chains until slave labour is abolished.
The Clean Clothes Campaign' Killer Jeans campaign has also had huge success with many brands outlawing the practice of sandblasting, a technique used to give jeans a "distressed" look but which can give workers silicosis of the lungs. Plus, as a result of Greenpeace's Dirty Laundry report, which exposed water pollution from textile manufacturing sites in China, several companies including H&M have now agreed to take action.
However once the pressure is off companies, many revert to their old ways. Back in 2002, H&M for example, promised to ban PVC from all their products, a commendable commitment in response to campaigns on what was back then a hot topic. Fast forward to 2011 and with other environmental issues making headlines H&M have inexplicably backtracked and are using PVC once again.
Our new buyers' guide rates the ethical and environmental record of over 30 clothes shops and shows that, incredibly, despite years of campaigning by labour rights activists, many companies are still failing to take even the most basic steps towards sweat-free production and sustainability.
Nine companies including Benetton, River Island and TK Maxx were among those unable to demonstrate to us that they had adequate policies in place to protect either workers' rights or the environment.
After we published our buyers' guide, Benetton provided us with information outlining how they are improving workers' conditions through supply chain management initiatives, which changes their scoring in this category from a worst to a middle rating. Benetton added that they began working on a Corporate Social Responsibility policy this June which will come into effect in 2012, a welcome development.
In response to our findings, River Island said:
While campaigners clearly will have a job for life battling with companies, consumers also have a key role to play. Katy Brown from Ethical Consumer and editor of the clothes shop buyers' guide said:
• This article was amended on 3 November to change 'any' to 'adequate' in the eighth paragraph
Fans of graduate fashion week might recall that catwalk antics this year included an elephant handbag and a trouser with one leg flared, one leg slender.
But there was also a different type of trend creeping into the shows this year - demonstrating a flair for commercial acumen, the Guardian reported. One of the judges, designer Henry Holland, said this year he'd seen a lot of students who recognised the need to have both commercial and catwalk pieces in their collections.
The Independent, also reporting on graduate fashion week, pointed out that colleges have strived to create links with industry over the past decade, a sign that students are graduating equipped with commercial expertise as well as the requisite skills in research, pattern cutting and design.
But where to take these skills upon graduation? Well, according to Guardian Money, in 2009 almost 70% of fashion design graduates found full-time employment, with nearly 30% working in retail and 28% in art and design. Talking about commercial nous, this could also come in handy if self-employment appeals - some graduates start out selling clothes on a market stall, while others blog about fashion, the article pointed out. PR for a fashion house could also appeal to fashion graduates, and within the media and publishing sectors opportunities exist for fashion illustrators, stylists and writers.
If you're keen to make your name in this competitive industry, or you'd like to know more about the options open to you once you've graduated, join our experts in a live Q&A. They'll be answering your questions and offering advice on Tuesday October 25 from 1pm until 4pm - you can post in advance anytime in the comments section below.
This content was brought to you by Guardian Professional. To keep up-to-date with our regular Q&A sessions, you can now sign-up for our newsletter here.
Stephanie Finnan is owner of The Fashion Careers Clinic, a careers advice service specifically for fashion, textiles and accessories designers.
Karinna Nobbs is a senior lecturer in International Fashion Branding at Glasgow Caledonian University (GCU), and GCU London. Previously Karinna has worked as a visual merchandiser at Benetton, Kookai and Polo Ralph Lauren.
Louise Kenny graduated with an MSc in International Fashion Marketing earlier this year and has gone on to work in online visual and display for Miss Selfridge. Louise also runs her own fashion label, Loula Creates, designing tights and leggings.
Elinor Renfrew is academic director of fashion at Kingston University.
Johanna Payton is a fashion journalist, broadcaster, lecturer, media trainer and author. She writes the fashion blog, www.fashiondetective.co.uk. In addition to her role as head of fashion for stylecompare.co.uk, Johanna is eBay's resident fashion blogger, features editor at hitched.co.uk and she has appeared fortnightly on Jo Good's BBC Radio London Late Show since March 2010.
Mal Burkinshaw is programme director for Fashion Design at Edinburgh College of Art, University of Edinburgh. He trained at Edinburgh College of Art before achieving an MA in Womenswear at the Royal College of Art, London.
Fiona Lambert is brand director at George. Fiona has worked for the company since its launch in 1990 and has been instrumental in taking the George brand forward. She will be online until 2pm.
Jane Gottelier is programme leader for Fashion Design and Performance Sportswear Design at University College Falmouth.
Dr Juliet Williams CBE is a director of the David Nieper Fashion Academy. David Nieper employs more than 240 people, including fashion designers, garment cutters and dressmakers. Through the Fashion Academy, David Nieper provides experience and training in fashion and manufacturing.
Kayleigh Archibald is in the sixth week of a three-month internship at David Nieper, a designer and manufacturer of lingerie, nightwear and clothing for women. A runner-up in the 2010 David Nieper Fashion Academy competition to find the best student fashion designers, Kayleigh's competition entry won her a £1,000 prize and an internship.
There scarcely needs to be more written on the anniversary of 9/11. But in recalling the events of ten years ago, the fashion desk were reminded of how some of the industry's journalists became improbably entangled in the horrific event.
When the twin towers were hit on September 11 2011, there were more journalists in New York than on a typical Tuesday morning. They'd flown in earlier that week from all over the world. The reason for this was New York Fashion Week, an intense period of hyperactivity for the fashion industry whose attention was entirely focused on the world of tents and catwalks. The journalists in question were there to report on runways, trends and clothes.
Instead, with flights across America grounded as the country went into a severe state of shock, those who hours before had been reporting on Marc Jacobs' collection were tasked with something much more formidable.
Laura Craik was reporting on fashion week for the Evening Standard.
Exiting the show at 9.30am, it wasn't immediately apparent that something was wrong. Sixth Avenue was bustling in the September sunshine, with most New Yorkers clamped to their cellphones, just as they always are. There was laughter on the streets. After the severe thunderstorms of the day before, the city was happy to be enjoying warm weather again. Then something changed. Some inexplicable tension began to crackle in the air. A girl began to cry. "Oh my god," a woman exclaimed, clapping her hand to her mouth. A policeman ordered a teenager off a payphone at the side of the street, saying he needed to make an urgent call. A plane had flown into the side of the World Trade Centre, he said. Terrorist attack. Suddenly, nobody's cellphone was working any more.
Craik, stranded in New York, was called on more than once to report for the Standard in lieu of any of their news reporters being able to get into the city.
Sarah Sands, a veteran who happened to be reporting for the Telegraph, summed up New York's unimaginable change in tenor, from sumptuous fashion central to "war zone".
Charlie Porter, in New York for the Guardian, wrote a piece the week after the terrorist attacks, in which he asked:
His account was vivid and simple. He quoted numerous colleagues from the fashion world, most of whom were in the same shocked state as any New Yorker, wondering how they found themselves having to work during such an unimaginably awful time. "I remember the clock on the TV showing 8.48am when the first image of the North Tower came on the screen," he wrote.
I can move fast, so the distance to lower Manhattan would not have been a problem. With hindsight, I know that I could have started to report straight away. But at the time it never even crossed my mind. I stayed in my hotel watching the news and not leaving my room until it was over. I was glad that my window faces north so I couldn't actually witness events first-hand.
The New York Times have published a terrific piece recalling the events of ten years ago, called "Fashion Week, Ten years Later: A Bond Forged in Tragedy". The article touches on the small ways in which people tried to help each other, particularly the designers who had lost their deposit on the cancelled shows and were facing financial difficulty. It's a good account of a small detail during a momentous week, but one which resembles many stories told around that period.
It would take the most hardened foreign reporter not to feel out of their comfort zone when faced with the enormity of reporting on 9/11. These were not accounts by professionals accustomed to handling a subject matter even close to that of terrorism, but people who were initially at a loss for words having to find them anyway. In a sense, maybe what these articles reveal ten years on is a great deal more human than traditional frontline reportage.
The advertising slogan of L'Oréal is "Because we're worth it". But it doesn't really mean it. If it did, it might include people who look like people in its marketing campaigns. And so the Advertising Standards Authority's decision this week to ban two L'Oréal adverts for deviousness could be the start of something wondrous.
The adverts featured the actress Julia Roberts and the model Christy Turlington promoting Lancôme's Teint Miracle foundation and Maybelline's the Eraser foundation. (Note the use of the word "erase". It means "annihilate".) Roberts is 43; Turlington 42. In the fashion and beauty world, they are as old as Yoda. So beauty did what beauty does; it examined the photographs, observed the flaws and eliminated them. The women emerged improbably radiant and extremely beige. They looked weird and alien and faintly radioactive, like the Ready Brek kids, but with smaller stomachs and longer necks. L'Oréal, the largest and most profitable beauty company in the world, was pleased.
But after a campaign by Jo Swinson, the Liberal Democrat MP, who emerges from this saga like Joan of Arc with a Wet One, the ASA ruled that the adverts misrepresented what the products could do to a normal face. The claims literally had no foundation. Roberts and Turlington had been digitally altered, Turlington to the extent that a piece of skin appeared to be shooting out of her cheek, possibly heaven-bound. L'Oréal pronounced itself "disappointed," which presumably means that if it had a face, its mascara would run on to its chin. The company has form in this. It has received complaints for promoting Telescopic mascara with Penelope Cruz in eyelash extensions and Elvive shampoo with Cheryl Cole in hair extensions, because there is no woman so beautiful, her hairs cannot be extended beyond their human capabilities. The Cruz complaint was upheld; the Cole one thrown out.
I am not against foundation. I take no such political position. To have a face like the bastard child of E.T. and Chewbacca is not my goal, even as I await the emails suggesting my opinions about the beauty and fashion industries stem from my own essential ugliness. A No Grooming Whatsoever manifesto is a straw man I would not touch with a blusher brush. But the lengths the beauty industry and its ugly sister, the fashion industry, run to sell their products are repellent and dangerous. In search of profit, they have created a homogenous ideal of female beauty that has nothing to do with what women actually look like. She is an abomination – starved and plucked and ironed and shrunk; she is the doll that looks like no one. Her goal is to sell dissatisfaction because liking your body sells nothing. Surveys say the majority of women are unhappy with their appearance and I blame the doll for almost all of it.
It has been a slow crawl for the doll. In the 50s and even the 70s – the 60s were a tentative audition for today – a size 12, with hips and breasts, could make it on to a billboard or into a movie. Marilyn Monroe, Jane Russell, Ava Gardner – all had flesh and interesting faces and imperfections. Russell's eyebrows looked like draft excluders and Gardner had a cleft chin you could topple into. They looked like individuals. No more. Models and actresses are tiny now, and curiously similar, with every trace of fat melted off, every shadow painted out. This is not just boring and offensive and a nightmare for people who like to see actresses who can act, rather than pout. It is a mass psychosis, where what is real is despised and what is non-existent is desirable. The camera lies, like never before. I await the first Franken-actress, composed of itinerant body parts glued together with CGI. I hope they don't forget the eyes.
When I attended couture week in Paris last year – an event of such monstrous self-delusion and inanity I will never go again – I stared at the girls because their upper arms were thinner than their lower ones. They looked sick in their hobbling heels and, therefore, as remote as ghosts. They were sallow and spotty; they had created the need for airbrushing themselves, for a want of toast and butter. Even so, very thin hands clapped. I thought the audience was mad to applaud such screaming symptoms of starvation, but no. They are simply immune. They have forgotten what normal people look like. In kinder moments, I can see that fashion people are also victims of their own cracked dreamland. Galliano is daft, McQueen is dead and both Valentino and Lagerfeld look as if they've have had enough plastic surgery to suggest they don't like the mirror, either. They look like unhappy, ageing women: they look like their customers.
When a model leaves the catwalk and dies of heart failure, or dies of anorexia with the whispered death-bed testimony of what the industry requires on her lips, there is always some chat about banning size-zero women from the shows and a suggestion that fat women (size six?) should be allowed to stagger up and down the catwalks in the stupid shoes. Giorgio Armani said in 2006: "The time has now come for clarity. We all need to work together against anorexia." But watch the fall/winter 2011-12 shows online and see if you think anything has changed. The status quo is re-established as the model goes cold.
Sometimes a product such as Dove will use "Real Women" – that means fat, with non-regular features – in its advertising, but this is gimmickry, a shove for the latest campaign. A normal-looking person in a beauty advert equals a global news story; what else do you need to know? In what you might call corporate altruism, although I call it something else, Dove (property of Unilever) has established a Self-Esteem Fund to help women combat advertising and the eating disorders even Unilever admits advertising creates, because "the average person sees between 400 and 600 advertisements per day," some of which are, presumably, Dove's. But go to their website. You will soon see young, thin models as well as "Real Women". Normal abnormality is re-established, even as the Self-Esteem Fund counts the teenage anorexics on its fingers.
The September Issue, the documentary about US Vogue, included a brilliant scene where the cameraman was photographed for the magazine. Well, not his head. He was presumably too ugly to appear with his head, but his body, all in black, was OK if his paunch was rubbed out. That was Vogue's revenge on the truth-teller: make him thinner, remove his head.
When women, and increasingly men, who are, poor things, the latest victims, see the gulf between the ideal and their own nasty reflections, what happens? Their hatred of their own selves grows – read the innumerable statistics – and vomit rises in the throat of yet more consumers. You can ignore the argument that growing obesity is a sign fashion advertising and beauty advertising has no impact. Anorexia and compulsive eating are twins, not opposites, and both, I think, a response to the doll.
I am thrilled Swinson and the ASA stood up to the doll and knocked her down. It could be the start of something beautiful. Or it could be a scream in the night, because she will be back. She is made of flesh and pixels – and money.
By now, most casually informed shoppers know that cheap fashion is something none of us can afford. We're aware that the nimble needlework of children has been found in high street shops, that seas have died satisfy our cotton addiction and that sweatshops are far from being a thing of the past. But according to Lucy Siegle's new book, this is just the thin end of an unsightly wedge. "Big Fashion" has become unsustainable and if you hoped you were doing your bit by avoiding Primark, you need to think again.
As well as being this paper's ethical living columnist, Siegle is a reformed fashionista. Her wardrobe, dubbed "fashionably overweight" by one expert, offers a bulging index of high street fashion fads from the past two decades. The story of its greening comprises the latter third of this book, but first, she leads us off on a tour of the industry's seamy side, totting up the real cost of trends such as It bags and "cheapskating".
There are conversations with Cambodian garment workers, visits to factories in Bangladesh and west Africa and tales of forced teen labour in the cotton fields of Uzbekistan. Human misery seems endemic at every point in the production line, from the alarming suicide rates among Indian farmers to young seamstresses forced to take contraceptive pills.
Social injustice is just one of the skeletons lurking in fashion's closet. There's also the industry's devastating environmental toll to consider – rivers flowing denim blue, the uncertain legacy of "Frankenpants" cut from GM cloth.
Animals don't fare much better. You'll have to trust me when I say that nobody of vegan sensibilities will want to hear about the sorry end met by silkworms – 1,500 of the little critters for every metre of fabric.
I'm ashamed to say I picked up this book feeling just a little bit, well, smug about my wardrobe. I'm a frugal shopper, waiting for the sales to buy pieces whose cuts and fabrics suggest they'll last more than a season or two. With a bit of rummaging, I can even produce an LBD that I still wear occasionally, almost 20 years since it was bought for my teen self in a Laura Ashley sale.
I was feeling downcast by the time I reached the end. Not much of the cotton I own is organic or fair trade, and what use is a "made in Italy" label if it's attached to a pair of heels which have been made by migrant labour with leather whose creation is helping to destroy the Amazon rainforest?
The unspoken purpose of the "quick fashion hit" is to race out of fashion or else fall obligingly to bits, sending its buyer back to the store for more. But our bulimic passion for fashion is symptomatic of a broader malaise. Disposability, instant gratification, the idea that impulses are there be indulged, regardless of impact – these sentiments permeate our lives.
Siegle doesn't really pause to consider this. It's anger that keeps her marching on through the dense data she has amassed. On the final page, however, she allows herself some love for a garment. Dropping off a bag of her old clothes with the designers at Junky Styling in London's Brick Lane in the East End, she returns a couple of days later to reclaim a made-to-measure cocktail dress.
Sustainable fashion has a hair shirt image, but while I'm less convinced about the matching cummerbund and bolero, I believe Siegle when she says that her dress is sophisticated. Only she knows that it is made of the first suit she ever bought. This ex-suit, she says, offers a chance "to recreate the joy I first found in clothes".
An unconventional beauty looks set to win Next's "Make Me the Next Model 2011" competition. He is the very chubby Roland Bunce, 24, from Belfast, a partying, drinking and wrestling enthusiast, and was in the top spot this afternoon, having been "liked" by 34,000 people on Next's Facebook button, miles ahead of the number two favourite, who had a measly 97 likes. It's John Sergeant and Strictly Come Dancing all over again but better, because this seems to be the public having a pop at the ghastly fashion world, with its blemish-free, pouty, stick models poncing about in odd garments that most of the rest of us wouldn't dare, or want, to wear. And even if we wanted to, many of us couldn't, because they wouldn't be in our size.
Perhaps I'm particularly embittered about the fashion world because I have size 9 and a half feet, buy size 14 clothes and have long arms and legs. And a long nose. So I prefer to stay in, barefoot and covered in a shroud. But that's a cowardly attitude. Bunce, on the other hand, is cheery and brave. He goes barrelling out, unselfconsciously, the absolute wrong shape for a model, and the country takes him to their hearts. This ought to encourage all the other people cowering at home to follow his example and stop being so wet. We can all be beautiful, inside. Only greedy, cruel people are ugly, through and through.
Top of my ugly list I place bankers, wealthy tax evaders, corrupt politicians, thugs and bullies, mass murderers, management consultants and anyone who taunts another person who looks vaguely unusual. I could go on, but it's just the usual crew. You're not on that list just because you have a few spots or look out of the ordinary.
So I can only applaud Bunce, but I am a bit worried about his weight. Perhaps he ought to watch it a bit and not let things get out of hand. We don't want him needle thin, but we want him fit and healthy and able to carry on his modelling career and inspirational behaviour well into old age, to prove that the elderly are also beautiful and ought to be out there on the catwalks. Why not? We all wear clothes. We don't stay in bed in our nighties. We want to be out there modelling the Next collection, or seeing our contemporaries doing it.
Hopefully this is a sign that the worm is turning. The people no longer wish to look like our present "models". They want to stop feeling inadequate and obliged to live up to an impossible ideal. Then they can all stop Botoxing, chopping, lipo-sucking, stretching and remoulding themselves and the cosmetic-surgery industry – together with the madder reaches of the fashion industry – can leave us to be any shape, size, colour or texture we want. That is my dream.
But it's still only a dream, because however many votes Buncy gets, the final selection – a shortlist of 50 candidates – will be made by "industry experts". Hopefully they'll be slightly put out by this public rebellion, which I hope is a sign of things to come.
As a young girl growing up in Wenzhou, southern China's "capital of capitalism", Sui He had a dream: to become a self-made businesswoman.
At 21, she is approaching the top, living in New York and flying around the world. But instead of becoming a hard-nosed entrepreneur, she is rising through the ranks of an equally cut-throat industry – as one of a new breed of Chinese models strolling the catwalks of London, Milan and New York.
"Editorial look and natural poise all the way," gushed one fashion blogger; "a delicate air that shifts to hard edge in a blink," raved another. Designers are equally enthusiastic: Sui He became the first Asian model ever to open for Ralph Lauren, the high priest of Wasp style, at New York fashion week.
But Sui He points out that she is not alone. "They had six Chinese models in the show – it was just by accident that I was the one who opened it," she said.
December's US Vogue featured eight east Asian models – Chinese, Korean and Japanese – in an "Asia Major" shoot. Liu Wen was the first Asian model to appear in a Victoria's Secret show and became Estée Lauder's first Asian "spokesmodel" last year; Maybelline has hired another Chinese model, Shu Pei. Feifei Sun, Emma Pei and Ming Xi have all walked for top designers. Lest the boys feel left out, Louis Vuitton recently hired Taiwanese-Canadian Godfrey Gao for a moody advertising campaign. "In the last couple of seasons you have seen a sudden increase," said Angelica Cheung, editor of Vogue China. "Even in the last two or three years it was pretty much about Du Juan: she was the only one going big. Now they have all appeared."
Sui He confesses that when she was growing up she thought of models as "flower vases" – a Chinese idiom indicating beauty but emptiness. Yet these days others are making bold claims for the significance of these new faces; the US Vogue spread announced that the models were "redefining traditional concepts of beauty" (traditional, that is, in the west). Liu Wen has declared of her compatriots: "We are making history every day."
A handful of models of Asian origin have been celebrated in the west before, such as Tina Chow. More recently, Du Juan became the first Asian model on the cover of French Vogue and has walked for Valentino and Yves Saint Laurent.
Yet New York magazine described Sui He's Ralph Lauren appearance as "the most surprising casting of the season", saying more about the persistent whiteness of the fashion industry than about its new-found diversity.
Cheung is proud to say that Vogue China played a part in the rise of Chinese models by flying in big-name international photographers for fashion spreads: "We pretty much launched [Du Juan's] career by having Patrick Demarchelier shoot her," she said. But, she concedes, there is another reason why Chinese models are in fashion: money. "Because of the economic problems elsewhere, China became the only shining spot. As a consumer market it has grown and grown," she said.
Consultancy firm Bain & Co reported recently that China would this year become the world's second largest luxury-goods market, with 25% growth taking it to $17bn-worth of sales. McKinsey predicts that by 2015 it will be worth $27bn.
Louis Vuitton's decision to hire Godfrey Gao was not only a testament to his razor-like cheekbones, but to the increasing clout of Chinese luxury consumers, more than half of whom are male. Similarly, Estée Lauder's decision to hire Liu Wen is less surprising given China's multi-billion-pound skincare and cosmetics industry. This gives some encouragement to those who hope east Asian models will continue to be used, despite the industry's history of showing a fleeting interest in, say, larger models or black women.
In 2008 Vogue Italia ran an issue using only black models, amid a bout of fashion industry introspection about its woeful lack of diversity. Yet this February, jezebel.com – which has tallied the model count at shows for several years – reported the whitest New York fashion week since 2008.
Blogger Jenny Zhang, who has written about fashion's representations of east Asian women, said: "I don't think this is just a fad because Asia is such a big luxury market. It doesn't seem to be a cultural shift, but a market shift – and maybe a cultural shift will come from that."
Dodai Stewart of jezebel.com, who has written about the lack of diversity among models, does not expect to see an Asian model on the cover of Vogue's all-powerful US edition any time soon. "I would love to and I think people would buy it – but I have low expectations," she said.
"It's not that the increasing visibility of Asian models doesn't matter, it's just that it doesn't matter enough," added Minh-Ha T. Pham, who will be appointed Assistant Professor at Cornell University this autumn, and one of the self-proclaimed "clotheshorse academics" behind the Threadbared blog exploring the politics of fashion. The lion's share of jobs still go to white models, she pointed out. "In celebrating a few exceptional editorials, I think we can become complacent to the racial and economic asymmetries that organise the fashion industry at large."
Many wonder if Asian models are really being celebrated for their individuality – or used to represent an Orientalised "other". The much-hyped Vogue shoot styled all the models in matching mohicans – not, in itself, a stereotypically Asian look, but one which made it harder to distinguish between their very different looks.
Whether or not Sui He and her compatriots appear in catwalk shows and glossy magazines is one question. How they appear, it seems, is quite another.
• This article was amended on 17 May 2011. The original referred to Minh-Ha T. Pham as associate professor at Illinois University, Urbana-Champaign. This has been corrected.
There are a number of members of the Hub working in fashion so it's worth taking note when one of the fashion industry's most famous names, supermodel Lily Cole, describes 'ethical fashion' as 'oxymoronic', particularly since she herself is the co-founder of an ethical fashion label, The North Circular.
But this apparent contradiction highlights a very important question for those who work in ethical fashion. Is it really possible to deliver meaningful positive social impact within an industry that is so inherently unsustainable?
The fashion industry, as it has evolved, is environmentally rapacious. It relies on consistent turnover, having four collections a year, every single year. As an industry its capacity to cultivate 'wants' and transform them into consumer 'needs' is unparalleled, with the result that consumers constantly feel compelled to replace their clothes, even if they haven't been worn.
The industry's waste record is alarming, with 1.2m tonnes of textiles ending up in landfill in the UK alone. The attitude to waste is reflected in the comments by the managing director of the clothing label, Lyle & Scott, when he indicated that he would rather 'burn' the company's excess stock than recycle it or sell it at a discount. Other companies, including Swedish clothing company H&M, have recently had their practice of dumping unsold stock exposed in the media.
While waste is certainly not a new issue in the fashion industry, it has undoubtedly become worse in recent years, as production costs have fallen and consumption has risen.
Much of the early focus of the ethical fashion movement was at the lowest level of the supply chains where efforts were made to improve the plight of farmers and factory workers in developing countries who supplied much of the labour and materials that fed the fashion machine in the developed world.
These efforts did have a social impact by highlighting the issues to the public and ultimately convincing large retailers, including Marks & Spencer's and Sainsbury's, to develop Fairtrade cotton clothing ranges. More recently, we have seen the emergence of Fairtrade gold, thanks in large part to the efforts of the ethical fashion movement in creating a market for it. Its popularity will undoubted grow as its use in jewellery products escalates, and particularly if as has been suggested, it is selected for the wedding bands at the royal marriage later this month.
But these improvements in the ethical sourcing of raw materials and products are still overshadowed by the fundamental issue of 'over-consumption' in the fashion industry. There is a certain irony that even when the ethical fashion movement wants to launch a campaign on sustainability that they often produce a t-shirt or a bag for people to buy to support the cause, as in the case of 'Climate Week'. Such practices serve to undermine the cause that they are trying to promote, linking saving the environment with ever more consumption.
Recently, parts of the ethical fashion movement have made major efforts to re-engineer waste from the fashion industry into the new higher-end products in a process known as 'upcycling'. Retailers such as Tesco and H & M have responded to the trend by developing their own ranges. But 'upcycled' products that depend on the off cuts of an already unsustainable fashion industry cannot logically solve the problem.
The solution lies with producers of clothes taking a much greater responsibility for managing the life cycle of their products and switching the emphasis towards 'slow fashion' that is of a higher quality and easily recyclable into new fashion products. Ultimately this will cost the consumer more and result in them buying less. But the consumer would then need to consider their purchases carefully and end up with items which would last longer and have real value.
It is natural that people will want to update their wardrobes but it simply isn't sustainable to do so through new purchases at the present rate. Initiatives like 'Swishing' where people meet up and swap clothes, shoes and accessories demonstrate there are other ways to refresh your style. Also companies such as Worn Again and Traidremade that 'upcycle' pre-existing textile waste and even waste material from other industries show that it is possible to create genuinely high quality sustainable fashion.
The fashion industry is at a crossroads and its next steps will be closely monitored by other industries where the blight of product obsolesce is driving unsustainable levels of consumption. The ethical fashion companies that will ultimately have the greatest social impact are those that challenge the current fashion paradigm and its 'cycles' and ultimately help return the industry to a sense of balance with consumers and the environment.
Dermot Egan is founding director at The Hub
This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To find out about forthcoming Q&As, sign up to the social enterprise network.
There was speculation about whether the two catwalk shows John Galliano is preparing in Paris – for Christian Dior on 4 March, and his own show two days later– will go ahead, in the wake of his arrest for allegedly assaulting a couple in a bar and making antisemitic insults.
The reaction of fashion insiders to the news of Galliano's arrest in Paris is twofold: that the designer has been involved in a drunken fracas surprises no one, but the allegations of violence, and of antisemitism, have left the industry shocked and puzzled.
Galliano, who turned 50 last year, has always been as personally flamboyant as the extraordinary clothes he designs. At the end of each of his fashion shows, he takes his bow in full theatrical costume, themed to match the collection: one season, he was Fagin in squished black top hat and hobnail boots; another, he was a matador, in skin-tight gold brocade.
Last year he said in an interview with Women's Wear Daily that he was currently teetotal, but there have been rumours at Dior that he was in a phase of "partying". A late-night row in a bar seems believable.
But as for the other allegations, one British fashion editor said she was deeply shocked because he had never come across as racist.
She said: "On the contrary, he embraces different cultures in his work – when he is researching a collection, he will travel and immerse himself in the place and the fabric and the people. The idea of him being violent is peculiar – he is not someone who raises his voice." Galliano was born in Gibraltar but when he was six his family moved to Peckham, south London, where his father worked as a plumber. "He is the antithesis of a snooty, white, upper-middle-class fashion designer," she pointed out.
Another magazine style director , described him as a vulnerable soul and "the last person I would have imagined to be racist". She said: "There is something fragile about him. He exposes so much of himself in his work, and that makes him vulnerable in a way the rest of us can't even imagine."
Galliano caused offence for what many perceived as gross insensitivity a decade ago when he used outfits improvised against harsh weather by homeless people in Paris, whom he saw every day while out running, as inspiration for a couture collection worth upwards of £10,000 per garment.
No one was surprised that Dior suspended him pending the police investigation. The house is a symbol of French national pride. Carla Bruni dresses for most official engagements in custom-made Dior, an alliance which has cemented the house's position at the heart of the French establishment.
Some suggested that owner LVMH might decide it is a good time to swap Galliano for a newer name – despite the huge success Dior has enjoyed under the designer over the past 15 years.
• This article was amended on 27 February 2011. The original headline, 'Bon viveur? Yes. Racist? Non', was felt to have been misleading, by giving the impression the writer had concluded John Galliano was not a racist before any allegation had been fully investigated. It has now been changed.
Maria Grachvogel's autumn 2011 collection, which she will show at the Savoy hotel this morning, is beautiful and, unusually for London fashion week which starts today, completely wearable for real women as well as beanpoles.
A quick preview on Wednesday morning revealed an elegant, body-skimming rather than tight black lace dress, with a flattering drop waist and to-the-knee hem and a long-sleeved dress in elegantly draped cashmere tweed. These clothes will look amazing on Grachvogel's customers, who range from Angelina Jolie and Yasmin Le Bon to perfectly normal-sized British women.
But you wouldn't know it, from the clothes going on the catwalk today. This season, Grachvogel has given in to fashion industry reality, and had the catwalk samples made in a size eight rather than the size 10 she has commissioned up until now – because it has become too difficult to find experienced catwalk models large enough to wear a size 10 dress on the catwalk.
"I have succumbed," was how she put it to me. "What can I do? I'd much rather make a size 10, but the clothes have to fit the models who are going to wear them." For the past three years, Grachvogel has been restricted to hiring the biggest models on agency books – "send me your curviest girls" has been her mantra – in order to fill out her size 10 samples. This season, she admitted defeat.
Making size 10 samples was never about Grachvogel making a political statement. Hers is not a label specifically aimed at curvy or plus-sized women, but at all women. (Size 10 and 12 are the most popular sizes in her Sloane Street store.) The change in sample size is a practical setback, because a key part of the design process has always been that Grachvogel and her core team, most of whom are roughly size 10, can try on the samples to see what flatters, and make adjustments accordingly. "Having real women try on the clothes and see how they work . . . is so helpful to me, as a designer."
There is no one in the fashion industry who would deny that models, and the sample sizes they wear on the catwalk, have got significantly slimmer in the past five years. Last week, supermodel Erin O'Connor admitted: "I'm a fashion model and I don't fit into the sample sizes. I haven't for some time. At one show I couldn't get into the trousers. The designer said, 'What happened to you?' I replied, 'Why don't you make your trousers bigger?"
The chicken-or-egg question of who is ultimately to blame is a sticky one. Grachvogel's experience is that model agencies no longer have size 10 models on their books, but others blame designers. Two years ago British Vogue editor Alexandra Shulman sent a strongly worded letter to many of the world's top fashion houses, asking them to stop producing "minuscule" press samples, which force her magazine to hire the skinniest of models in order to wear them.
The size zero debate is emotively linked to several high-profile deaths among anorexic models, but Grachvogel is not convinced that anorexia is to blame for the shrinking size of models. "The model industry is international now, and body shapes that a decade ago were unusual in Britain have become standard. Ten years ago, the standard British body shape for a 5ft 10in model was a size 10 with size seven or eight feet. Now there are many, many Eastern European models who are that tall, but with very fine, narrow bone structure. Typically they have size five or six feet. They are built differently."
These girls may be perfectly healthy. The problem, as Grachvogel points out, is that "this is an unachievable body shape for most women. It is absurd and frustrating that women are so obsessed with trying to conform to a body shape which is simply impossible for most of us." Grachvogel's design studio is in the same building as her boutique, and she regularly overhears women on the shopfloor who don't want to buy a dress if the label says size 10 rather than size 8. "We need to break out of this obsession with size, and focus on what works," she says.
"What I love doing as a designer is making clothes that make real women, women of different heights and shapes and sizes, look beautiful and feel amazing. It's frustrating that I can't put that on the catwalk."
On the eve of London Fashion Week, Erin O'Connor – described by Karl Lagerfeld as "one of the best models in the world" – had a confession to make. "I'm a fashion model and I don't fit into the sample sizes. I haven't for some time. At one show I couldn't get into the trousers. The designer said, 'What happened to you?' I replied, 'Why don't you make your trousers bigger?'"
She described herself as being made to feel like a "commodity". "Fashion is built on perpetuating fantasy. There is a sense of uniformity. We have forgotten how to be individuals."
O'Connor was speaking alongside equalities minister Lynne Featherstone at a debate for All Walks Beyond the Catwalk, an ambitious event held over three floors of the National Portrait Gallery. The aim? To stamp out "the dominance of a singular aesthetic", or fashion's obsession with youth, perfection and size zero.
The latest target? Airbrushing and trickery in advertising. Several key players called for industry regulation with various ideas proposed: kite-marking to indicate digital tampering, or a "golden star" system for natural images.
Organiser Caryn Franklin, the one-time BBC Clothes Show presenter, led the attack: "We must question the manipulation of imagery." Many magazine editors have told her, off the record, that they are concerned that the culture of digital enhancement is getting out of control. "They wish there were guidelines for dealing with photographers who ingratiate themselves with celebrities by creating the most polished of shots."
On view for one night only was Rankin's Snapped, a photographic collection of models of all sizes and ages in creations by Vivienne Westwood, Stella McCartney, Matthew Williamson and other British designers, all inspired by portraits in the gallery. An estimated 3,000 visitors turned up, marking the unofficial opening of London Fashion Week, which starts on Friday.
This week, O'Connor also opens the doors of her "models' sanctuary" in London's Covent Garden for the fourth year running. This is a non-profit drop-in centre visited by more than 200 models a day during the shows, where they can seek advice from nutritionists, life coaches and physiotherapists. "Ninety per cent of models are aged 16 to 19. As an industry we have to take responsibility for them," said O'Connor.
On the debate's stage, the predominant colour was regulation fashion black. The only other glimpse of colour came from Featherstone's white shirt and the Christian Louboutin red-soled shoes worn by Elle editor Lorraine Candy. She opposes regulation: "We're not a charity. We're producing what women want. If they didn't want it, they wouldn't buy it."
She said, however, that she had recently rejected "a very famous young Hollywood celeb" for a cover shoot because she had had too much plastic surgery. "It was unrealistic to make my readers feel they should look like that."
Since All Walks was set up in 2009 by O'Connor, Franklin and fashion PR Debra Bourne, more voluptuous models and older women have appeared on the catwalk, most recently at Prada and Louis Vuitton. Tackling digital enhancement is the next step.
"Women believe these images are real," said panel member Kiki Kendrick, the advertising guru who came up with the "size 16 Barbie" for the Body Shop. "That is what happened with the girl who had herself injected with silicone," she added, referring to 20-year-old Briton Claudia Seye Aderotimi, who died in Philadelphia last week after a "buttock enhancement" operation went wrong.
Perhaps the least enthusiastic panel member was the equalities minister. Featherstone said that while she was concerned about "the consequences of this unattainable ideal", the issue could not be about "banning or legislating". Surprising comments perhaps, given that last year she called for the air-brushing kitemark as part of the Lib Dems' Body Confidence campaign.
At the National Portrait Gallery it was a different story: "As both a politician and a parent I can see the kind of pressure that people of all ages are under to look a certain way, and I want to see something done about it. But to change the way things work we can't impose rules from above and demand that magazines and catwalks only feature people who are a certain height or a certain weight."
These remarks come in stark contrast to the line taken by her Lib Dem parliamentary colleague Jo Swinson. She supports regulation, arguing that this is an issue of social responsibility. "The extent to which people's basic body shape is changed is something that is not widely known. I would prefer something that gives the consumer information about how much airbrushing has gone on. One option is a labelling system, a coloured dial like the one used for nutritional information, so you could differentiate between 'purely fantastical' and 'not airbrushed at all'."
She added: "We are getting some traction [with the fashion industry] and the threat of regulation is key. If advertisers refuse, I believe the government should keep an open mind about regulation."
Calls for a practical solution are gaining momentum. An all-party parliamentary group on body image launches next month and a new study on the psychological impact of fashion imagery is expected from Cambridge University next year. Swinson recently submitted a portfolio of 172 academic studies on the detrimental effects of idealistic advertising to the Advertising Standards Authority. It was rejected. Swinson said: "They are resistant to change. They say they don't regulate the portrayal of the body and only react to complaints."
Ethical fashion is trying for a wider audience in France. Organic cotton goods now on sale at H&M and La Redoute have made them mainstream, while Louis-Marie and Nathalie Vautier, who opened their first Ekyog shop in 2004, pride themselves on enforcing strict certification from the fields to distribution.
No pesticides or fertilisers are used on crops, only limited heavy metals are present in dyes, goods are transported by boat, and producers guaranteed a minimum price, so the organic cotton they buy costs about 60% more than the standard product. Ekyog is now the leading environmentally aware brand in France, with 46 shops and $11m sales in 2009.
But it will only just break even this year. "We have invested a lot, without achieving critical mass, and the crisis has affected our sales," says Vautier.
The price of all raw cotton is soaring, according to Rachel Liu, a founder of Ekyog rival Idéo. "In India they are forecasting a 50% to 100% increase in the cost of the summer 2011 collection. We have had very tough negotiations with our trading partners to try to make them understand that we cannot possibly pass on such huge increases to the consumer."
She reckons that fair trade clothing is "nearing the end of a cycle. We will have to change the way we dress, take the opposite course to throwaway fashion, make our clothes last, find ways of reusing them."
British fashion is not just about designer frocks; it is a serious business that contributes almost £21bn to the UK economy, according to the findings of a landmark report to be launched tomorrow on the eve of London Fashion Week.
The Value of the UK Fashion Industry report was commissioned by the British Fashion Council and seeks for the first time to quantify the true economic and social impact of the UK fashion industry.
The research highlights not only the direct impact of the fashion industry, including wholesale, retail and manufacturing, on the economy but also its effect on other industries including financial services and tourism.
Ed Vaizey, minister for creative industries who launched the report alongside Vince Cable, noted its significance and said that it "confirms British fashion's status as one of our most important creative industries".
Harold Tillman, chairman of the BFC, commented: "Fashion is a great British success story, [the research] underlines its true scope and economic impact."
The report, by economic consultants Oxford Economics, says the UK fashion industry is the largest employer of all the creative industries, directly employing 816,000 people. The industry is similar in size to food and drink services and generates more than twice as many jobs as real estate, and considerably more than telecommunications, car manufacturing and publishing put together.
Alexander Shulman, editor of British Vogue, said she thought the report was "a very intelligent idea".
"It's important to show how big a business fashion is," she said.
"The word fashion is considered a relatively narrow term which makes people think of something rarefied, enjoyable but possibly trivial. Over the past 10 years in Britain we've seen how much a part of people's lives fashion has become. The difference in the broad appeal of high fashion is tremendous thanks to collaborations with very high-end designers and the high street has become bigger and better."
Other fashion insiders hoped the report will lead to a higher level of respect for the industry. Paula Reed, style director at Grazia magazine, said: "For a long time people have underestimated fashion in terms if its importance to the wealth of the nation. The general attitude often seems to be that working in fashion isn't a real job – but it is in fact lots of people's 'real jobs'."
The report's unveiling is intended as a boost to London Fashion Week and its international standing. It notes that the event helps to build British fashion as a brand abroad which in turn has an impact on tourism, attracting visitors to the UK to shop or visit fashion exhibitions. A minimum estimate puts this tourism impact at a value of £98m in 2009.
Vaizey, who admits to being dubbed the minister for fashion, noted: "British Fashion has the talent, creativity and skills to rival anywhere in the world. Our new and established designers are internationally renowned for their unique vision at the cutting edge of this hugely important global industry."
Reed noted that "any recognition by the government helps our standing abroad. When Downing Street supports British fashion that hugely impresses foreign editors and buyers and encourages them to come to London Fashion Week. The more we can incentivise them to do that, and see for themselves the amazing talent here, the better."
Earlier in the week, internationally acclaimed designer Tom Ford, who launched his first eponymous womenswear collection in New York on Sunday, revealed that next season he would be moving his showrooms to London where his design studios already are. Having such a prestigious name in the city is expected to boost British fashion further.
However the report also found that there were still many challenges facing the fashion industry, including a lack of business skills among many smaller fashion businesses which contributes to a high level of labels folding in their infancy. It warns that growing competition from other international catwalks could challenge London Fashion Week's reputation as the most creative capital. It highlights the need to promote the best practise on sustainability and to encourage the growth of a UK manufacturing base.
"This is just the first step," noted Tillman. "I am committed to driving this forward and to ensuring that we come together as an industry to work with government to discuss forthcoming challenges and agree the support required to overcome them."
• The direct value of the fashion industry to the UK economy is £21bn Indirect 'spill over' effects ranging from IT to tourism puts fashions total contribution at £37bn. • Fashion employs 816,000 people directly making 2.8% of total employment in the UK
•The fashion industry's contribution – directly and indirectly – to UK GDP is estimated at £37.2bn in 2009. Of this £20.9bn is due directly to retail, wholesale and manufacture.
• In 2008 consumers spent £46bn on clothes and shoes alone (not counting make up, glossy magazines and other related purchases)
•London fashion week makes £20m a year for the capital and draws in orders of £100 million
The coalition government is to put the fashion industry under pressure to stop promoting unrealistic body images and clamp down on airbrushed photographs in magazines and adverts.
Lynne Featherstone, the equalities minister, who has long campaigned against size-zero photoshoots, will convene a series of discussions this autumn with the fashion industry, including magazine editors and advertising executives, to discuss how to promote body confidence among young people.
The first will focus on airbrushing, which Featherstone argues is contributing to "the dreadful pressure that young people, girls and women come under to conform to completely unachievable body stereotypes".
She will push for a Kitemark or health warning on airbrushed photographs, warning viewers that they are not real. "I am very keen that children and young women should be informed about airbrushing, so they don't fall victim to looking at an image and thinking that anyone can have a 12in waist. It is so not possible," she told the Sunday Times.
The minister wants to see more women of different shapes and sizes used in magazine photoshoots, including curvaceous role models such as Christina Hendricks, who plays vivacious office manager Joan Holloway in Mad Men, the US TV series about the 1960s advertising industry.
"Christina Hendricks is absolutely fabulous. We need more of those role models," she said. Instead, young girls and women were continually confronted with false images of incredibly thin women, which could create lifelong psychological damage. It was an issue that should worry "any of us who have children".
"All women have felt that pressure of having to conform to an unrealistic stereotype, which plagues them their whole life. It is not just the immediate harm; it is something that lasts a lifetime. Young girls are under intense pressure the whole time," she said, adding: "I was a young girl many moons ago."
Featherstone stressed the pressure to conform is also felt by men: "The pressure is on for everyone to look perfect."
She is trying to convince magazine editors and advertisers to stop using digitally altered photographs and underweight models. "Advertisers and magazine editors have a right to publish what they choose, but women and girls also have the right to be comfortable in their own bodies. At the moment, they are being denied that," she said.
Magazines that do retouch pictures run the risk of breaking their own code of conduct, which states they should not publish inaccurate, misleading or distorted information, she added. "Magazines regularly mislead their readers by publishing distorted images that have been secretly airbrushed and altered."
She also called the actions of the advertising industry into question. "Likewise, the advertising standards code says no advert should place children at risk of mental, physical or moral harm, but adverts do contain airbrushed images of unattainable beauty in magazines aimed at young teenagers."
Featherstone's comments come a week after "plus-size" model Crystal Renn complained that she had been retouched to look several sizes smaller for an ad campaign. Last year the Olay cosmetics firm was criticised by the advertising watchdog for retouching a photograph of Twiggy, removing wrinkles around her eyes in an ad for an under-eye cream.
Some UK fashion companies are exploiting unpaid interns who sometimes work 12 hours or more a day for months on end with little prospect of a paid job afterwards. Fashion interns say they often outnumber paid staff and claim some companies rely heavily on free labour.
A few months after completing a postgraduate degree in fashion, 25-year-old Rufus Cassidy* took up an unpaid internship with top fashion house Alexander McQueen.
"Most days I worked from 8.30 in the morning until at least 2am," he says. "We usually worked seven days a week and some of the interns got really tired because of the hours."
Cassidy also claims the company relied on interns to carry out core work. "In the pattern making department there were 10 interns and only five paid staff. In embroidery there was just one designer and 10 interns."
In May last year, after eight months of unpaid work, he quit. "I left because it was obvious there was virtually no chance of getting a job there," he says. "They would have been happy for me to continue, but I just couldn't afford to go on working for nothing. I had already done five unpaid fashion internships elsewhere."
Employment law expert Timothy Brennan QC says companies who use interns in the way described by Cassidy could be breaking national minimum wage rules.
"The most important thing as far as the minimum wage is concerned is what the real arrangement is, not whether someone is called an intern or not," Brennan says. "If someone is engaged on a regular basis for an extended period of time to sew sequins on to ball gowns or similar work, which is a core part of a clothing manufacturer's operation, then that person may well be considered an employee or worker and would be entitled to the minimum wage."
Interns at Alexander McQueen are asked to sign an agreement which includes an opt-out from working time regulations which limit the working week to 48 hours. The agreement states that this opt-out can be withdrawn by the intern at any time, on giving three months' written notice. It also says interns "must obey all reasonable instructions that we give you and work such hours as are necessary to properly complete the tasks you are asked to undertake".
Brennan says this agreement suggests the company's interns are, in fact, "workers", and therefore due the minimum wage.
"In the absence of any other material, I would be fairly confident of persuading an employment tribunal that someone who actually worked under a contract on these terms was a worker," he says. "You don't need to contract out of the working time regulations if you are not a worker. If you are within working time regulations because you are a worker, you are within the national minimum wage as a worker."
In a statement, Alexander McQueen told Guardian Work it was confident that it treats its interns in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations. They said that "Alexander McQueen has had immensely positive feedback from its great many interns. Assuming that you have spoken to two or three interns, that represents a tiny minority of those who have passed through AMQ's scheme. The critical issues that your sources have raised are completely out of line with the overwhelming majority of interns."
The hours Cassidy was expected to work by the company may also breach other provisions of the working time regulations.
"In my view, the long hours you describe break working time regulations which say there must be at least 11 hours' rest within any 24-hour period and that every adult worker must have a break of not less that 24 hours in each seven-day period," says David McBride, an employment lawyer with Thompsons Solicitors.
Alexander McQueen's lawyers told Work: "The fashion industry is by no means unique in requiring on occasions those who work in it to undertake long hours." Prospective interns, they added, were "fully informed about the nature of the work they are asked to do," and any intern was "well aware of the purpose of the internship and that there was no guarantee of a job at the end of it". Those who participated gained "invaluable experience", and enhanced their CVs and career prospects.
They also said interns were involved as closely as possible with both the culture, the working practices and the highly skilled activities of the company, that they were closely supervised and were provided with work which was "not only suitable to them, but which also will provide them with the best opportunities to learn".
Periods of intense activity were periodic only, they insisted, such as in the run-up to collections. "The working hours of interns in the run-up to shows where our client is exhibiting collections must be seen in the context of the fact that all of our client's staff work long hours on these occasions – which is normal in the fashion industry," the statement said. When such hours were required, they added, interns were provided with food and taxis home and offered days off to compensate.
Alexander McQueen also denied that interns were expected to carry out core work. They described the claim that interns formed a large part of the workforce in the pattern-making and embroidery departments as "untrue and incredible" and pointed out that such assertions "betrayed a complete ignorance of Alexander McQueen's employee structure", which includes a substantial design team in London supplemented by several freelance technicians and about 60 employees in Italy, and a number of subcontractors who undertake creative and production tasks.
Alexander McQueen is not alone in the fashion world in attracting criticism. Former interns and staff at a number of other fashion companies claim that long hours and excessive expectations can place intense pressure on young staff.
"The designer was constantly shouting at students as young as 19, saying, 'You're fucking useless, you don't know what you're doing,' whenever they didn't do something properly," says a former manager at a small but well-known fashion house which relies heavily on interns. "These girls would be working from 8am to 1am in the run-up to fashion week and some would start crying and getting hysterical because they were being expected to do a job perfectly which they'd never done before."
For some, it gets too much. "I have seen people quit because it's such a stressed atmosphere," says a former intern with a larger fashion company. "If you haven't been able to finish something on time, they keep pushing you saying, 'The designer wants it now,' even when you say it's impossible."
Former interns Work has spoken to at another company claim they were exposed to harmful chemicals. "We had to use a toxic liquid to artificially rust metal," one says. "I got nosebleeds after using it and other students did too. At first we used this chemical in a normal room with no special ventilation, but after a week, when everyone had been getting nose bleeds, they told us to work outside on the balcony even though it was freezing cold."
A former fashion student who was an intern with the same company, but at a different time, adds: "The liquid we had to use to age metal caused us to get skin infections. One girl was affected so badly she had to go to hospital and take time off."
Dr Emanuele Lugli, a lecturer at the Istituto Marangoni fashion and design school, says young people put up with these conditions because internships have become essential for anyone who wants a career in the industry.
"Students are constantly telling me how companies are staffing entire departments with interns who work incredibly long hours and are put under enormous pressure," he says. "But they still want to do internships at these places because they are desperate for the experience and to work for these big-name brands."
However, designer Anna Heinrup, a successful fashion consultant, points out that interns can play an important and mutually beneficial role in helping fledgling designers off the ground.
"Some start-ups depend on interns to survive," she explains. "And when I was an intern I had better experiences in small companies because I felt I had more responsibility and could make a real difference."
But not all her experiences were positive. "I worked for one designer for three months where the interns did everything and she didn't even know our names," she says. "There were 10 interns and just three staff and we had to work from 9.30am until up to 10pm in a freezing cold building. The designer didn't care if we were looked after or not because there were lots of young people willing to go there."
While some fashion interns find themselves under intense pressure, others report being required to carry out mundane tasks for weeks on end, giving them little experience of value.
"I was left alone all day in a small fashion cupboard with no windows and no chair, and the only thing I had to do was send samples back to PRs and tidy up the cupboard," says a former intern with a leading women's fashion magazine. "There was nothing creative on offer at all."
Not all interns have a negative experience, however. "I did some really exciting things like go on a cover shoot and work with well-known models," says a former intern at the London office of an international fashion magazine. "It was really friendly and I enjoyed myself."
Another former fashion student, who spent three months working unpaid as a marketing assistant with a well-known UK fashion house, says the internship was organised around her needs, not the other way round.
"I saw all sides of the business," she says, "so I got a real insight into how the industry works, helping me decide what I wanted to do."
Alex Try of Interns Anonymous, an online forum for interns, argues that the increasing popularity of unpaid internships may actually be making it more difficult for new graduates to get employment.
"Posts that were previously offered to new graduates are now being staffed by unpaid interns," he says, "so entry-level jobs are disappearing. Why would a company fork out £15,000 to £20,000 a year for an entry-level fashion designer, when they have an endless supply of people willing to do it for free?"
There have, however, been successful challenges to employers who take advantage of interns. Work reader Michelle Jackson was paid £1,000 for work she had done during a six-week internship with an advertising agency after her tax office told her she might be entitled to the minimum wage.
"They put me in touch with the National Minimum Wage Helpline who investigated the agency and found they had a history of using unpaid placements as free labour," she says. "They were ordered to pay me for the work I'd done as well as any other students they had employed and not paid."
Last November, an employment tribunal ordered London Dream Motion Pictures to make backdated minimum wage payments to Nicola Vetta, an art department assistant who had been taken on by the company on an expenses-only basis.
Martin Spence, assistant general secretary of Bectu, the union that supported Vetta's case, was optimistic that the ruling would set a precedent. "We hope this judgment will draw a line in the sand and we will see more employers complying with the law," he said.
Others, however, think a more fundamental change is needed, such as setting a limit on how long someone is allowed to work unpaid.
"Three months would be an appropriate limit for the length of internships, because an organisation should know by then whether they want to give someone a job or not," says Stephen Overell, associate director of The Work Foundation. "Internships should be about giving people an insight into the sector they are interested in working in, but they should not flip over into working for free."
*Name has been changed
As a woman you reach a certain age where you start to become invisible. It's an odd sensation, as if someone has thrown a Potterish invisibility cloak over you. It's a sort of inversion of the old joke of sticking a Post-it note with a daft message to your back, the joke now being that people on the street look straight through you. It has little to do with aesthetics; it's more chemical than that. It is just that women, more than men, occupy space in the world's consciousness in correlation with youth. (I can pinpoint exactly when it happened to me: I was 34. But that's just me; my life has always been weirdly date-specific. I grew up when I was 28.)
But, what's this? In the space of the last year, a curious thing has happened. Older women have become increasingly visible in the arena in which, above all others, nubile youth has long trumped all else: fashion. Of all the spheres of influence in which youth and beauty could be relied upon to rule with an iron grip, fashion has long been the most ruthless. (Best ever fashion-world horror story for pure terrifying evilness – I'm assuming it's apocryphal – is about the parties held by Rachel Zoe's mini-me starlets in LA at the height of the size-zero obsession, where the guest list consisted of a pair of weighing scales at the door, and no girls weighing more than 100lbs were allowed in.) Yet next season's Dolce & Gabbana advertising campaign, unveiled last week, stars Madonna (51). Hot label of the moment Celine – the campaign every model must have wanted this season – has chosen a veteran face from the 1990s superwaif era, Emma Balfour (40). Balenciaga stars Stella Tennant (39); Louis Vuitton, whose new collection was dubbed "And God Created Woman" by designer Marc Jacobs, featured Elle Macpherson (47) on the catwalk and stars Christy Turlington (41) in its latest print campaign. Glossy magazines at both ends of the style spectrum have chosen older models for their latest issues: Macpherson is on the cover of the new Tatler, while Dazed features Kristen McMenamy (46) as the newstand face of an issue dedicated to "iconic models" on sale tomorrow.
Inez van Lamsweerde and Vinoodh Matadin are a Dutch photographic duo who have been working together for two decades. They recently shot a new campaign for Yves Saint Laurent starring 26-year-old Daria Werbowy. Until not long ago, 26 was very much past one's prime, as a model, but Lamsweerde and Matadin recently told vogue.com that "models like Kate [Moss] and Daria are mature, they've grown up, they're women who have had a life and experience. For about five or six years now we haven't shot anyone under 18 for that reason, but also for the fact that, we feel the modelling business should not promote girls working under this age. They're not out of school – their bodies haven't developed yet and they don't have a sense of self. Sometimes they haven't had sex yet. It's hard to project all these things on someone who hasn't had that experience."
Such common sense is completely revolutionary. Until recently, few in the industry would acknowledge that there was something a teensy bit shallow and moronic and possibly even dubious about taking a 16-year-old model with a head full of Justin Bieber daydreams and GCSE revision notes and dressing her up as a sophisticated femme fatale, arranging her supine on an unmade hotel bed, while dripping with diamond bracelets and thousand-pound handbags and wearing a bored-of-it-all expression. Extreme youth was part and parcel of the fantasy of fashion.
The new visibility of older models is part of a shift in fashion from fantasy to wearability. For the past 10 years, one adjective has reigned supreme above others in fashion. If it was good – whether it was a model, a dress, a handbag, a cocktail – it was "fabulous". Fabulous, in the Oxford English Dictionary, has two meanings: extraordinary, and also "having no basis in reality; mythical". Our obsession with fabulousness was always very much about a yearning for the impossible, a boomtime obsession with pushing boundaries. The word feels, now, like a compliment from another era.
The age of austerity dawned in fashion months before George Osborne got his hands on the keys to No 11. In March, the Paris catwalks were full of grown-up clothes in sensible, wearable colours. Even before the bloodbath budget, fashion had a new buzzword to replace fabulousness – "believability". Easy-to-do ponytails and walkable-heeled shoes are hot topics in fashion right now. The issue of whether the women who can afford these clothes can also wear them without looking absurd is deemed relevant again.
Francisco Costa, designer of Calvin Klein, cast Kristen McMenamy and Stella Tennant for his most recent catwalk show in New York. "I wanted a cast that really represented a customer I design for, and that's not really a 16-year-old," he said after the show. "The woman who puts my clothes on needs a certain level of sophistication. We wanted to acknowledge the women who have always worn our clothes: women who have their own identities, have full lives, have kids."
Next month, the all-important September issues of the glossy magazines appear. Current industry rumour has it that the cover girls for the American giants run as follows: Julia Roberts for Elle, Halle Berry for Vogue, and Jennifer Aniston for Harpers Bazaar. If this is true, Aniston – at 41 – will be the youngest cover girl of the big three. If older women can reappear in fashion, then anything is possible. There may even be hope in Hollywood.
Kelly Cutrone receives between 75 and 100 inquiries every day, mostly from young women and gay men around the globe. Their request is always the same: they are asking for an internship at her company, People's Revolution. With a PR agency that represents some of the biggest names in the fashion industry - in the UK alone, labels on her roster include Henry Holland and Agent Provocateur - Cutrone has become a lighthouse for aspiring fashion folk. Recurring stints on MTV reality shows The Hills and The City show her dishing out harsh realities about a business that is notoriously nepotistic, but always a popular career choice. Here, she offers some insider advice.
Work is the new four-letter word. People want to work in fashion and go to fashion shoots because it looks glamorous. What they don't realise is that you have to walk around the city, picking up clothes in garment bags and filling out insurance forms. When you get to the photo shoot no one is going to care that you are there, even though you are really pretty and went to a really great school. They are going to say, "Hey, you" 700 times, "Go get me a coffee", or "Can you make this 15-year-old model who is seven foot taller than you and getting paid $10,000, while you are working for free, feel good?" That's the reality. If it hurts your feelings, then you're in the wrong industry.
It's not enough to just know somebody or have somebody open the door; once the door is open you have to walk through and set up your shop. Consistency is such a simple thing: if you show up somewhere every day and get the job done right, over and over, then things grow. At People's Revolution, when people are doing a good job, we always make a point to acknowledge it, remember their name and invite them for dinner. But you have to wait, that's just how it works.
Do not Facebook the owner of a fashion agency asking for a job. I've said this before and yet people still Facebook me. The messages often contain grammatical errors, they don't make sense or they are littered with acronyms like LOL. Phrases such as "I have a passion for fashion" or "Fashion is what my life is about" are my pet hates. If you do Facebook the owner, have something interesting to say and use a spell check.
Don't stand next to my desk with an idea and a notepad when I am on a conference call trying to make $100,000. However, I do like it when interns offer up ideas - not every day, but when it's honest, right and correct.
You have to believe in the beauty of fashion, whether it's the power of colour, structure or line. With fashion, you have to be enamoured by it, never fully understanding it and always wanting to know more.
Olivier Zahm, who founded Purple magazine, is a great visionary in fashion. He's seen everything, yet if you bring him somewhere cool and he sees something beautiful, he still gets excited. These are the only people in fashion that I want to hang out with.
You don't have to hail from the big city and be dripping in diamonds to work in fashion. The village girl might not have been the prettiest, the most economically privileged or the smartest girl, but she has a strong work ethic and is often the most frequently looked over. She's tenacious, kind and intuitive. Through proper cultivation, mentoring or the right environment, it's "Ding!" and she's in her game. Don't underestimate her.
When you work in this industry, you'll always have the feeling that you are never really finished with a project. There's always something more that could be done, but it's also about knowing when to let go. Attention to detail and great organisation skills are useful attributes too.
Fashion takes itself way too seriously and has a sense of exclusivity. No other fields are like that. From rock'n'roll to chess, they don't care where you're from, they invite everybody in. They understand that most of the greatest artists, sports stars, musicians and fashion designers came from nothing.
Use your intuition here: if you really feel that you should do it now, then follow your instinct. For me, it was what I needed to do [Cutrone decided at 23 that she wanted to start her own company] but I put myself through a lot of needless trouble. If I could have sat still a little longer, I would have been better off. A lot of stuff can be learned while you're still in a job and being paid, such as understanding your accounts, learning industry terminology and locating the best contacts.
If You Have to Cry, Go Outside, from £9.06 on Amazon.
Hands on hips, shoulders back, head raised proudly, Christina Lewis poses for photos on her style blog. Here she is in a body-con miniskirt, with faux fur cape, and deep, vampish red lipstick. Here, again, in a tight Topshop dress, black biker jacket and ferocious, feathered collar. Then, once more, in a PVC dress, a studded waistcoat, and heavy Jil Sander shoes that look capable of breaking a breeze block with a single swing. She is tough, strong, beautiful. As cool and cutting-edge as they come.
Lewis is also a US size 24 (UK 26), and her style blog, Musings of a Fatshionista, has been building a strong following in recent months. On her site she describes herself as "fat and fancy as it gets", before writing that, "when your options are seemingly limited, how do you stand out and be as fabulous as everyone else? By not being afraid to take risks".
A 24-year-old graphic designer from Takoma Park, Maryland, Lewis began developing her sense of style while at art school in Philadelphia. Since then, she tells me, "I'm never afraid to put myself out there with what I wear. I always tell people I don't dress to look slim, I dress to look amazing!"
Lewis's site is one of a wave of new style blogs by women who are defying their marginalisation by the fashion world. So, for instance, there's Young, Fat and Fabulous, run by Gabi Gregg, a 23-year-old teacher from Michigan, who says she started it because other sites "didn't know what was going on on the streets". Bloggers in the US are also behind Fatshionable and the Manfattan Project; there are plus-size bloggers in France, Australia, Germany and Poland.
In Britain, Diane Dennis, a 34-year-old fashion designer from Birmingham, runs Fat Girls Like Nice Clothes Too. I ask whether she paused before using the word "fat" in her blog title, and she says: "No, not really. I wanted to be direct, to stick my fingers up at fashion, and say 'Yes, I am fat. So what?'"
The sites vary, but most feature photographs of favourite outfits, reviews of plus-size fashion lines, as well as images of some of the women who inspire them, such as singer Beth Ditto, and model Kelli Jean Drinkwater. Most recently, many have featured Gabourey Sidibe, star of surprise hit movie Precious, who has been transforming perceptions of beauty and body image these past few weeks, striding the red carpet in dress after couture dress.
These sites represent the point where two internet trends collide. The first is the growth of a loose collection of blogs affectionately known as the "fat-o-sphere". On sites such as the highly popular Shapely Prose, writers and readers discuss issues surrounding body image and fat acceptance (the idea that people should accept their weight, give up dieting, and commit themselves to being healthy at their current size.)
At the same time, following the enormous success of The Sartorialist blog – where Scott Schuman posts photographs of stylish people he encounters in the streets – style blogs have become more varied, and more focused. Thirteen-year-old fashion writer Tavi Gevinson has caused a sensation, and Ari Seth Cohen's Advanced Style site has been capturing "New York's most stylish and creative older folks". Style blogs are democratising fashion, offering much more diverse images than we're used to.
Fat people are perhaps the least visible group of all in fashion terms, a status that plays out in two related ways. First is the paucity of clothes available to anyone over a certain size, a source of sadness for many fat style bloggers. "I think people underestimate how difficult it is to stay current, because the options are very limited", says Gregg.
It is also a source of inspiration. Lilli Hingee, 31, who works in publishing in Melbourne, began her site, Frocks and Frou Frou, partly because "the plus-size market in Australia is really, really dreadful", and partly as a result of seeing other women struggle with what was available. Hingee is a self-described "curvy girl" – neither fat nor thin – and on her site she documents items in larger sizes available from international fashion lines. In the last months of 2009, she posted a picture of herself in a different dress each day, for a project she called "frockapalooza".
The other way in which fat women – indeed, almost all women – are marginalised, is in terms of fashion imagery, with an insistence on extremely thin, young, and generally white women in magazines and on catwalks. In the past few months there have been small signs that attitudes are changing. Last year US Glamour magazine ran an image of plus-size model Lizzie Miller, sitting naked and unperturbed by her small, soft belly, which provoked a huge response. Glamour editor Cindi Leive, was then inspired to run another photoshoot with plus-size models – again, all posed naked. This month, high fashion magazine V ran its size issue, featuring a photoshoot by fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld, which pictured burlesque star Miss Dirty Martini in an array of bras, nipple tassels and suspenders.
Both Glamour and V have also run images of plus-size models in clothes, but it's interesting to note how many shoots depict them either half or fully naked. The images seem intent on fetishising big women, depicting them as intensely sexual beings, creatures of great appetites – not an unusual theme on the internet, where fat fetishist sites abound. Kate Harding, the writer behind Shapely Prose, points out that "they put them naked, and it's supposed to be this revolution, and in fact it's just like 'Great! You objectified someone a little bigger!'"
Compare these images to those available on the mother of all fat style blogs: Fatshionista. This began as an online forum in 2004, and has since gone from strength to strength. Described as "a heady mixture of social politics, fat-girl memoir, and popular culture", it now centres around a personal blog run by Lesley Kinzel, and still includes a forum where readers discuss "plus-size clothes swaps", or where to get a sports bra.
But perhaps the site's most mesmerizing feature is its Flickr gallery, where anyone US size 14 (UK 16) and over can post photographs of themselves in their favourite outfits. So you have a stunning woman in a red dress, a tattoo spreading rapturously across her chest. There's another tattooed lady in a peacock tunic, her bright yellow sandals echoing her bright yellow hair. There's a woman in a pink and green flowered mod dress with pink tights. There are women in satin cocktail dresses with lace gloves; cartoon print tunics with cowboy boots; hotpants with a jumper and beret; in swimsuits, bikinis, and tight, tight T-shirts. Thousands of women staring defiantly at the camera, daring someone to suggest they're not gorgeous.
Clicking through these photos, you get a sense of just how easy it might actually be to change our visual culture. Dodai Stewart, deputy editor of popular women's website Jezebel, has written of her first encounter with Fatshionista that "while scrolling through the images, it was startling, at first, to see picture after picture of 'fat', plus-size, or heavy women. Not because of their bodies, or their clothes – they look fantastic – but because I just wasn't used to it".
I ask feminist and psychoanalyst Susie Orbach, author of Bodies, whether she thinks these sites could shift our cultural outlook, expand our notions of beauty. "There's no doubt that they could," she says, before explaining the way we respond to images. "How do we get from a trend for straight-legged jeans to wide jeans? At first we find the new image foreign and horrible, and then it becomes very present, and we start to feel there's something wrong with us because we don't conform to it, and we want to catch up. It's the same with body image". Because we constantly see photographs of very thin women, many of them Photoshopped, we spend our lives trying to fit that impossible ideal – a relentless, often futile quest. "If we were seeing images, not just of fat women, but of all sizes, we wouldn't be continually having to catch up in terms of our own body size," says Orbach, "so we wouldn't be wanting to change it. We might feel that we were represented, and then we could focus on other aspects of our lives".
Some claim that the sites promote obesity, that by showing stylish, proud fat women, they may encourage others to put on weight. Orbach disagrees. "I think thinness is what promotes obesity, because it promotes dieting, and dieting is one of the biggest causes of disturbed eating." Her one concern is that some of the photographs could be considered objectifying, "I'd much rather see women doing something, rather than just staring at the camera", she says. Stewart offers another take on this. "Fashion can be great," she says, "but the women we see in magazines, and on catwalks, often seem like a kind of clone army. They all look the same, and they're reduced to the status of coat hangers: the ultimate objects. Then you look at women on sites like Fatshionista, and the photographs are as much about their individual personalities as they are about the clothes. You see the style and the person combined." In fashion terms then, these women appear the ultimate subjects.
Orbach feels the sites are "trying to transform aspects of visual culture, which will be very helpful to people. I wish they were in the mainstream". Others also hope – and suspect – that this might happen. Kinzel suggests "it's inevitable that not just fat fashion blogs, but all fashion blogging, will have an impact. It's hard for fashion magazines to compete when you have amazing free blogs like The Sartorialist and Advanced Style. Fashion has always existed as a place that people look to, aspire to, and admire from afar, but never feel part of. That's changing. The sudden use of more plus-size models in fashion magazines is absolutely influenced, however vaguely, by fashion blogs that show a diversity of people".
There are certainly signs that these sites are having an affect on individual women. Ragini Nag Rao, a student from Kolkata, India, first started posting pictures of herself on Fatshionista in 2008, after struggling with her body image. "For the first time in my life," she says, "I was seeing these people who were my size, and larger, and who all looked great, and I thought 'If they can do it, why can't I?'" Nag Rao recently started her own blog, Forays in Fatshion, and when I ask whether this has improved her self-confidence, she says, "Yes, radically. It's transformed me, really".
Many of these bloggers see what they're doing as a political statement, as well as an enjoyable pursuit. "Being fat and comfortable with yourself, and calling yourself fashionable, is in itself political," says Gregg. "It runs against what the mainstream considers possible". Nag Rao agrees. "Putting pictures of myself up on the internet is my small act of fat activism. When I upload my pictures, I always tag them with the words 'obesity epidemic' and '200lbs' because this is what the obesity epidemic looks like. It's not the huge, headless fatty that you see in the newspapers. This is it."
Why are so many fashion trends ­impossible to wear if you have breasts larger than a B-cup size?
Ah, Meredith, you have cannily stumbled on that interesting split-screen effect of the fashion world, the dichotomy ­between misogyny and empowerment. Is fashion a cruel anti-female industry whose sole goal is to make women feel bad about themselves and force them to wear crippling, uncomfortable apparel? Or is it empowering, ­allowing women to wear clothes that appeal primarily to themselves as ­opposed to men? Oh, 'twould be easier to disentangle those pesky squabbles in the Middle East than to establish the definitive answer to this tricky little number. And the centre of this debate is the breast issue.
Breasts and fashion go together like snow and train schedules: the latter just doesn't take the existence of the former into account, despite the high likelihood that it will encounter it at some point. Fashion haters will say that designers' disinterest-verging-on-­distaste for breasts proves that they are misogynistic pigs, interested only in designing for anorexic 19-year-olds.
But there is another possible ­interpretation. For all the accusations of narcissism with which fashion gets pelted, the industry has remarkably ­little interest in making people look ­attractive. It's interested in making people look different. So when people complain that those £4,000 Balmain jackets don't suit anybody, they're just missing the point. Those jackets aren't about making anyone look good, they're about making you look like you're wearing Balmain. You see? Different.
And this is why the breast issue is so ripe with possibility. Is there not something marvellous about an industry that has so little interest in the one part of a woman's anatomy that the rest of the world is obsessed with? One of the truly commendable things about fashion is how little interest it has in appealing to straight men, or making women look attractive to them. This, I've always maintained, is part of the reason why fashion gets such a bad rap; because it is basically a private-members' club that excludes men. "Fashion's just about appealing to gay men," one of my (straight) male friends sneered recently, as though that was a criticism. And thank God for it. As this column's life icon, Joan Rivers, said once when she saw a celebrity wearing a terrible dress allegedly chosen by her boyfriend, "Well, at least you can say that her ­boyfriend is straight." When it comes to aesthetics, straight men have no sense at all. After all, they're the ones so obsessed with mammary glands.
I would applaud the industry's ­disinterest in what straight men think, but unfortunately my Balmain jacket is so restrictive around the chest that I can't actually raise my arms to clap.
Claire's Accessories sells child-size sashes for "Girl's [sic] On Tour". ­Topshop sells "Shiney [sic] Footless Tights". Should I stop sending these companies hate mail and accept that nobody cares except me and Lynne Truss?
No, not at all, Libby. But I have to be honest: I find the idea of shiny tights and sashes proclaiming that the wearer is "on tour" far more distressing than any abused punctuation. And what, in the name of all that is tasteful and bearable, were you doing in Claire's ­Accessories anyway? This column is all about cheap accessories but there is a distinct difference between cheap and tatty and I think we all know into which camp Claire's Accessories falls. So not to knock you and Madame Truss, but in the face of such horror, it kinda puts the whole apostrophe issue into ­perspective, don't you think?
• Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com
While economists and bankers argue over bonuses and who was to blame for the recession, battle lines are being drawn in the cosmetics industry over a huge anticipated sales boom in lipstick.
Over the past few months, the fashion industry has been closely watching the "lipstick effect" – last seen in New York after the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 – when women react to uncertain times by scaling back spending on designer clothes and handbags, but splurge on cheaper luxuries. Cosmetics counters in the UK have already seen dramatic rises in lipstick sales this winter.
Now the big beauty houses are jostling to cash in on the 2010 "lipstick wars". This spring the biggest brand names will roll out major new ranges of "statement colours", competing for the coolest models and A-list celebrities to appear in their adverts as they fight for a share in the lipstick boom.
Scarlett Johansson's famous pout is painted bold berry red for a new collection by Dolce & Gabbana, while Chanel has persuaded French singer Vanessa Paradis, the partner of Johnny Depp, to be the face of its new Rouge Coco lipstick, to be launched in March.
Georgia Jagger, who has inherited her father Mick's famous lips, has coated hers in deepest red for Rimmel's spring/summer collection, while Bobbi Brown is launching a new range of lipsticks next month, including the one colour that needs more courage to wear than red – coral – along with a campaign to show women how to wear it.
"We're going very big this spring, bold and bright, as was seen at all the shows," said a Dolce & Gabbana spokeswoman. "The growth of internet videos that show women how to put on make-up is helping," added Selfridges' Niravta Patel.
"The lipstick effect has seen an uplift of an average of 12% in sales here," Patel said. Sales have surged by 20% on last year at Yves Saint Laurent and by 15% at Dior. "It's all about statement colours in key cosmetic trends for this spring, rather than what designer shoes or clothes you are wearing.
"All ages are being really adventurous with their lips and nails, and even with false eyelashes."
Some 81% of British women wear lipstick, and 13% of them reapply it more than eight times a day. But just as hemlines and heels rise and fall, lipstick has gone in and out of fashion.
The Ancient Egyptians never left home without it. Cleopatra crushed carmine beetles and Elizabeth I used beeswax and plant extracts. In 1770 parliament made lipstick illegal, ruling that women found guilty of "seducing men into matrimony by a cosmetic means" could be tried for witchcraft.
Victoria thought it "vulgar" but, in the 1920s, books of etiquette for flapper girls decreed that it was proper to apply lipstick at the table during lunch, but never at dinner.
Gwyneth Paltrow has commented that beauty "was about being comfortable in your own skin. That or a kick-ass red lipstick."
"A lipstick is a woman's best friend and can instantly add glamour to any look," said Paul Herrington, UK head of artistry for Bobbi Brown, explaining the huge sales rise which saw the firm run out of its Classic Red lipstick over Christmas. Younger people who might have settled for a lip gloss are turning to full-coloured drama on their lips, he said.
"We are now seeing the trend switch back to traditional lipstick textures. Women are choosing brighter and bolder lipstick colours, because it takes no effort but gives the maximum impact."
Sales surged after 9/11; Leonard Lauder, the chairman of Estée Lauder, called it his "lipstick index" theory, but the phenomenon was first seen during the Great Depression of the 1930s.
So, for those who feel that better times are here – the National Institute of Socio-Economic Research announced last week that the recession was over – an indicator to the contrary might just come from the mouths of women on the streets of Britain showing the colour of their lipstick.
As sassy 1930s actress and feminist Carole Lombard put it: "I've lived by a man's code designed to fit a man's world, yet at the same time I never forget that a woman's first job is to choose the right shade of lipstick."
But a note of caution: the average woman consumes between 4lb and 6lb of lipstick in her lifetime, ­somewhat nauseating given that a 2007 study found that 60% of the lipsticks on the American market contained traces of lead.
What's the right response to the fashion industry's woes? 
 
It's a miserable time for fashion. Last week Versace announced it was completely pulling out of Japan, where it has had a presence since 1981. The fashion house also told the world it would be laying off over a quarter of its current workforce.
Then on Tuesday there was the shocking news that British label Luella would cease trading, after a major backer dropped out of any future investment. 
 
Unsurprisingly, it's been a mammoth task for us to find our usual brand of irreverent humour in any of these happenings, when the very world by which we make a buck is crumbling around our ears. And so, rather than deny our sadness, we've decided to embrace it. Here then, is Fashion Statement's ode to Luella: 
Underwear as outerwear 
 
This is a prospect that will be displeasing to most Fashion Statement readers, we think. Nevertheless, we will press ahead and hope for the best. The idea is to work this look in one of two ways. The first is to go for a burlesque 40s and 50s feel: lots of structure, visible boning and obvious seams on corset-like tops and dresses - think a wearable Madonna. The other way is to wear standout underwear under sheer fabrics. Now, take a deep breath, count to five and we'll plunge in ... 
 
Easing ourselves in to the lukewarm waters of this particular trend, we'll start with something reassuringly too expensive for most of us at £350: Red Valentino's lace panel dress. Net-a-porter suggests wearing it with a neon camisole, which we think would work a treat as hints of bright colour would show through the transparent part. Also way too expensive (but gorgeous all the same) is Giambattista Valli's LBD. Made from black satin, it rocks a strapless bustier top and costs a cool £1,535. 
 
We also have to mention Richard Nicol's stunning gold corset dress, but as it costs £1,335, that's all we're saying. 
 
French Connection's Dreamer Dress comes in either blue or black with boning in the waist, and is subtly sexy without being too 'in yer face'. At £120 it's not at the lowest end of the price range, but it's not bad either. USC have got a nice cheat's version of the look - a T-shirt with a corset print for £30. 
 
If you'd like something French and floaty, go for Lipsy's pink chiffon number. It's quite short but has delicate ruching around the bodice, and comes in at a very reasonable £65. For the brave (some might say foolhardy), we've discovered a fab petticoat dress at £100 from asos.com. It's like the offspring of a period drama and the Rocky Horror Picture Show. 
 
Whatkatydid.com has a wardrobe's worth of sexy vintage-effect lingerie, which is perfect for wearing under sheer tops or peeking out under lace. We especially like the sailor bra (£44.50) and the glamour longline bra for £35. For the adventurous reader, there's also the bullet bra (£32.50): just in case your imagination isn't filling in the gaps effectively, when wearing this one you'll need to be careful about poking people's eyes out. 
 
Princesse Tam Tam's lacy bodysuit (may no thunderbolt strike us down for daring to use that word) will require some sort of nipple-hiding device to be worn underneath, but it sure is pretty (£61.50). 
 
For a bra that really deserves to be seen, look no further than Dutch designer Marlies Dekkers. She creates amazing sculptural lingerie and swimwear which, as well as being incredibly fashion-forward, is good for bigger busts too. We like this Silver Fleet bra for £86, as the back of it is as noteworthy as the front. 
 
The ethical underwear shopper will like Enamore's gorgeous white Dixie camisole. It's made from organic silk and trimmed with soft, heart-shaped scalloped lace and a navy-and-white gingham bow (made to order at £68).
Iman 
 
We're not sure why we like this look so much. It could be that we simply admire Iman for managing to defy the ravages of time and look like she's about 20 when she's really 54. In this picture she is at the Glamour Women of the Year Awards and is wearing a pink feathery Jason Wu outfit.
Thanks to a Christmas press release from Liberty, legendary musician Ronnie Wood has forced his way back to the forefront of Fashion Statement's consciousness. This, however, is A Bad Thing. Ronnie spends his spare time painting. He's not the best at it, bless him. But the silly folk at Liberty have let him paint on expensive fabrics. Guess what? They've been made into actual dresses and are to be sold to the criminally tasteless for upwards of £300. Buy now online!
"I kept saying 'Excuse me, excuse me, excuse me,' because I had to get to the catwalk, but she just kept posing. So I pushed her. It was only a few stairs." 
 
Lara Stone reveals her impatient side to Vogue magazine.
Interested in fashion in the media? Live in or near to Manchester? Then check out the Meet the Media event organised by the Manchester Fashion Network. The evening of Monday 30 November will see Drapers editor Jessica Price Brown take part in a Q&A session. Tickets cost £10 and more information is available at manchesterfashion.com
Into vintage looks but need help finding and putting together an outfit? Look no further than Queensofvintage.com. The ladies are launching a two-hour workshop run by Naomi Thompson, where you will get top tips for collecting vintage, learn how to put together an outfit based on body shape, and how to mix and match vintage and modern elements to create your own style. The sessions cost £35 (tea is included!) For more details visit queensofvintage.com.
Pleasing news for ethical fashion fans: there's a new shop in town showcasing the winners of the First into Fashion competition (which helps young graduates kick-start their own business), Julia Smith and Joanna Stoker. Their new boutique stands at 4 Porchester Place, London, and will hold Julia's ethical womenswear collection - her clothes are made in England using only organic or sustainable fabrics - and Joanna's shoe designs. 
 
We think we may have found the next Stephen Jones in William Chambers, a Glasgow-based milliner. His hat designs are quirky and interesting, featuring all manner of crazy details. The autumn/winter collection is all about 30s and 40s glamour, fusing traditional cloche and pillbox shapes with intense colour and animal prints. Trilbies, berets and oversized bows in magenta, purple, red and mustard also feature, as well as snakeskin trims, copper flowers and outrageous feather sprays. We likey. Find out more at williamchambers.co.uk
Read Elizabeth Day's interview with Henry Holland. 
 
Jess Cartner Morley tackles X Factor hairstyles, while Simon Chilvers guides you through this season's hair for men. 
 
Hadley Freeman discusses the dreaded 'cankle'.
For all the latest fashion news visit guardian.co.uk/fashion
News to tell us? Email rachel.holmes@guardian.co.uk
Luella Bartley, one of the British fashion industry's biggest success stories, announced today that her Luella fashion label has ceased trading after a key financier pulled out.
Club 21, the company which holds the licence to supply shops with Bartley's preppy, punky ready-to-wear clothes and accessories, withdrew from its partnership with the designer, and said in a statement it had decided "not to invest further". The move follows the unexpected closure last month of the brand's key ready-to-wear manufacturer, Carla Carini.
Named British Designer of the Year in 2008, Bartley regularly receives rave reviews from press and buyers alike for her "English eccentric" style shows. Her latest collection, for spring/summer 2010 and featuring bows, heart-shaped cut-outs and her signature colourful prom dresses, was shown during the 25th anniversary of London fashion week in September to critical acclaim. Unless other backers are found this collection is unlikely to appear in stores.
With an estimated turnover of £9m and celebrities including Gwyneth Paltrow, Sienna Miller, Alexa Chung and Lily Allen wearing her designs, Bartley has built a strong identity for her
brand over the last 10 years.
"This is a very disappointing situation for everyone involved with the brand," Bartley said. "I have had an incredible team around me and very much appreciate the support that VSQ [a subsidiary of Club 21] have given me, but it is upsetting not to be able to protect jobs in this difficult economic climate.
"I love the Luella character and hope that after we have survived this challenging time the Luella girl can have an exciting future ahead of her, whichever incarnation she takes on next. We have a number of options open to us and are considering these over the coming months."
A former fashion journalist for the Evening Standard, Vogue, The Face and Dazed and Confused, and friend to stylist Katie Grand and designer Giles Deacon, Bartley shot to fame with her first collection Daddy, I Want a Pony in 1999, which she presented in Pulp bassist Steve Mackay's flat.
The show created such a buzz within the industry that the following February she made her London fashion week debut with Daddy Who Were The Clash?
Moving first to Milan then New York to increase sales, the designer returned to London in 2007, opening a store in Brook Street and becoming a favourite of buyers and editors on the schedule.
Lunchtime in a fashionable cafe in west London, and a sleek young woman in an expensive ivory silk blouse and deftly cut black jacket smiles and asks the waitress what the soup of the day is. "Pea and ham," comes the reply. The customer's smile fades. Stella McCartney leans her head to one side and narrows her wide, grey-green eyes. "Why do you have to put the ham in it?" she demands, her voice cool and low but fractionally louder than it was a moment ago. The waitress, landed with the thankless task of defending pea and ham soup to one of Britain's most outspoken vegetarians, can only shrug and look mortified. McCartney sighs. "Oh, it's not your fault," she concedes, ordering scrambled eggs on rye toast instead. "But maybe next time, they could just leave out the ham?"
The true legacy, it seems, of an upbringing in the inner court of 70s rock aristocracy is less a penchant for sex, drugs and rock'n'roll than a trenchant respect for nature and a belief in vegetarianism. Right now, McCartney is a woman on a mission, her two passions having come together in a drive to encourage us to reduce our carbon footprint by cutting back on meat consumption.
As a fashion designer, she has spent 15 years trying to distance herself from the "Beatle's daughter" tag. But the moment I ask her about where her principles come from, all that changes. "The way my parents brought me up to see the world is still absolutely key to what I am about," she says. "The beliefs I was raised with – to respect animals and to be aware of nature, to understand that we share this planet with other creatures – have had a huge impact on me."
McCartney was born in 1971, shortly after the Beatles split up. After years on the road with Wings, Paul and Linda moved their family – Heather, Linda's daughter from her first marriage, along with Stella and her siblings Mary and James – to an organic farm in Sussex where they raised sheep, rode horses, grew vegetables, went to the local state schools. "I was brought up to understand that we are all here on planet earth together. The idea of taking responsibility for what we take out of the earth . . . it's not something we sat down and had lessons in; as a way of thinking it came quite naturally." Alternative though it sounds, Stella's upbringing sounds rather old-fashioned, in its way. The best piece of advice she was ever given, she tells me, was "do unto others as you would be done unto yourself. My mum and dad always said that and I don't think you can go far wrong with that." From the viewpoint of today's melting icecaps, the ethos of respect for nature in which the farm was steeped seems more prescient than far-out.
